Test3 
READING 
READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1- 13, which are based on Reading 
Passage 1 on the following pages. 
Questions 1-4 
Reading Passage 1 has five paragraphs, A- E. 
Choose the correct heading for paragraphs 8-E from the list of headings below. 
Write the correct number, i-vii, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Example 
List of Headings 
Economic and social significance of tourism 
ii The development of mass tourism 
iii Travel for the wealthy 
iv Earning foreign exchange through tourism 
v Difficulty in recognising the economic effects of tourism 
vi The contribution of air travel to tourism 
vii The world impact of tourism 
viii The history of travel 
Answer 
Paragraph A viii 
Paragraph B 
Paragraph C 
Paragraph D 
Paragraph E 
64 AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 
Reading 
The Context, Meaning 
and Scope of Touris11'i. 
A Travel has existed since the beginning of time, when primitive man set out, often 
traversing great distances in search of game, which provided the food and clothing 
necessary for his survival. Throughout the course of history, people have travelled 
for purposes of trade , religiou s conviction, economic gain. war, migration and other 
equally compe lling motivations. Jn the Roman era, wealthy aristocrats and high 
government officials also travelled for pleasure. Seaside resorts located at Pompeii 
and Herculaneum afforded citize ns the opportunity to escape to their vacation villas 
in order to avoid the summer heat of Rome . Travel, excep t during the Dark Ages, 
has continued to grow and, throughout recorded history, has played a vital role in the 
development of civilisations and their economies . 
B Tourism in the mass form as we know it today is a distinctly twentieth-century 
phenomenon. Historians suggest that the advent of mass tourism began in England 
during the industrial revolution with the rise of the middle class and the availability 
of relatively inexpensive transportation. The creation of the comme rcial airline 
industry following the Second World War and the subsequent development of the 
jet aircraft in the 1950s signalled the rapid growth and expansion of international 
travel. This growth led to the development of a major new industry: tourism. In turn, 
international tourism became the concern of a number of world governments since 
it not only provided new employment opportunities but also produced a means of 
earning foreign exchange. 
C Tourism today has grown significantly in both economic and social importance . In 
most industrialised countries over the past few years the fastest growth has been 
seen in the area of services. One of the largest segments of the service industry, 
although largely unrecognised as an entity in some of these countries, is travel 
and tourism. According to the World Travel and Tourism Council (1992), 'Travel 
and tourism is the largest industry in the world on virtually any economic meas ure 
including value-added capital investment, employment and tax contribution s'. In 
1992, the industry's gross output was estimated to be $3.5 trillion, over 12 per cent 
of all consumer spending . The travel and tourism industry is the world's largest 
employer with almost 130 million jobs, or almost 7 per cent of all employee s. Thi s 
industry is the world's leading industrial contributor, producing over 6 per cent of 
the world's gross national product and accounting for capital investment in excess 
of $422 billion in direct, indirect and personal taxes each year. Thu s, tour ism has a 
profound impact both on the world economy and, because of the educative effect of 
travel and the effects on employment , on society itself. 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 65 
Test 3 
D However, the major problems of the travel and tourism industry that have hidden, 
or obscured, its economic impact are the diversity and fragmentation of the 
industry itself. The travel industry includes: hotels , motels and other types of 
accommodation; restaurants and other food services; transportat ion services and 
facilities; amusements, attractions and other leisure facilities; gift shops and a 
large number of other enterprises. Since many of these businesses also serve 
local residents, the impact of spending by visitors can easily be overlooked or 
underestimated. In addition, Meis (1992) points out that the tourism industry 
involves concepts that have remained amorphou s to both analysts and decision 
makers. Moreover, in all nations this problem has made it difficult for the industry 
to develop any type of reliable or credible tourism information base in order to 
estimate the contribution it makes to regionalt national and global economies. 
However, the nature of this very diversity makes travel and tourism ideaJ vehicles 
for economic development in a wide variety of countries, regions or communities. 
E Once the exclusive province of the wealthy, travel and tourism have become an 
institutionali sed way of life for most of the population. In fact, Mcintosh and 
Goeldner ( 1990) suggest that tourism has become the largest commodity in 
international trade for many nations and, for a significant number of other countries, 
it ranks second or third. For example, tourism is the major source of income in 
Bermuda , Greece, Italy, Spain, Switzerland and most Caribbean count ries. In 
addition, Hawkins and Ritchie , quoting from data published by the American 
Express Company, suggest that the travel and tourism industry is the number 
one ranked employer in the Bahama s, Brazil , Canada, France, (the former) West 
Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Singapore, the United Kingdom and 
the United States. However, because of problem s of definition, which directly affect 
statistical measurement, it is not possible with any degree of certainty to provide 
precise, valid or reliable data about the extent of world-wide tourism participation 
or its economic impact. In many cases, similar difficulties arise when attempts are 
made to measure domestic tourism. 
66 APARINESH IBLTS House I WWW. IELTS-House. C!Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions ~ 10 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1? 
In boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
if the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
5 The largest employment figures in the world are found in the travel and tourism 
industry. 
6 Tourism contributes over six per cent of the Australian gross national product. 
7 Tourism has a social impact because it promotes recreation . 
8 Two main features of the travel and tourism industry make its economic significance 
difficult to ascertain. 
9 Visitor spending is always greater than the spending of residents in tourist areas . 
1 O It is easy to show statistically how tourism affects individual economies . 
Questions 11-13 
Complete the sentences below. 
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet. 
11 In Greece , tourism is the most important ...................... . 
12 The travel and tourism industry in Jamaica is the major ...................... . 
13 The problems associated with measuring international tourism are often reflected in 
the measurement of ...................... . 
AFARINESH IELTS Bouse I www.IBLTS-House.com 
67 
Test 3 
READING PASSAGE 2 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26 , which are based on Reading 
Passage 2 below. 
Autw•mn leaves 
Canadian writer Jay Ingram investigates the 
mystery of why leaves turn red in the fall 
A One of the most captivating natural events of the year in many areas throughout 
North America is the turning of the leaves in the fall. The colours are magnificent, 
but the questio n of exac tly why some trees tum yellow or orange, and others red or 
purple , is something which has long puzzled scientists . 
B Summer leaves are green because they are full of chlorophyll , the molecule that 
captures sunlight and converts that energy into new building material s for the tree. 
As fall appro aches in the northern hemisphere , the amount of solar energy availab le 
declines considerably. For many trees - evergreen conifers being an exception -
the best strategy is to abandon photosynthesis• until the spring. So rather than 
maintaining the now redundant leaves throughout the winter, the tree saves it.., 
precious resources and discards them. But befor e letting its leaves go, the tree 
dismantles their chlorophyll molecules and ships their valuable nitrogen back into 
the twigs. As chlorophy ll is depleted, other colours that have been dominated by it 
throughout the summe r begin to be revealed. This unmasking explains the autumn 
colours of yellow and orange , but not the brilliant reds and purples of trees such as 
the maple or sumac. 
C The source of the red is widely known: it is created by anthocyanins , water-solub le 
plant pigments reflecting the red to blue range of the visible spectrum . They belong to 
a class of sugar-based chemical compo unds also known as ftavonoids. What's puzzling 
is that anth ocyanins are actually newly minted , made in the leaves at the same time as 
the tree is preparing to drop them . But it is hard to make sense of the manufac ture of 
anthocyani.ns - why should a tre e bother making new chemic als in its leaves when it's 
already scrambling to withdraw and preseive the ones already there'? 
D Some theories about anthocyani.ns have argued that they might act as a chemical 
defence against atta cks by insects or fungi, or that they might attract fruit-eating 
birds or increase a leafs tole rance to freezing. However there are problems with 
each of these theories, including the fact that leaves are red for such a relatively 
short period that the expe nse of energy needed to manuf actu re the anthocyanins 
would outweigh any anti-fungal or anti-herbivo re activity achieved . 
•photosynthesis: the production of new material from sunlight, water and carbon dioxide 
68 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House .c:Ol'll 
Reading 
E It has also been proposed that trees may produce vivid red colours to convince 
herbivorous insects that they are healthy and robust and would be easily able 
to mount chemical defences against infestation. If insects paid attention to 
such advertisements , they might be prompted to lay their eggs on a duller, and 
presumably less resistant host The flaw in this theory lies in the lack of proof 
to support it. No one has as yet ascertained whether more robust trees sport the 
brightest leaves, or whether insects make choices according to colour intensity. 
F Perhaps the most plausible suggestion as to why leaves would go to the trouble 
of making antho cyanins when they're busy packing up for the winter is the 
theory known as the 'light screen ' hypothesis . It sounds paradoxical , because the 
idea behind this hypothesis is that the red pigment is made in autumn leaves to 
protect chlorophyll, the light-absorbing chemical , from too much light. Why does 
chlorophyll need protection when it is the natural world's supreme light absorber ? 
Why prote ct chlorophy ll at a time when the tree is brealdng it down to salvage as 
much of it as possible? 
G Chlorophyll , although exquisitely evolved to capture the energy of sunlight, 
can sometimes be overwhelmed by it, especially in situations of drought , low 
temperature s, or nutrient deficiency. Moreover , the problem of oversensitivity 
to light is even more acute in the fall, when the leaf is busy preparing for winter 
by dismantling its internal machinery. The energy absorbed by the chlo rophyll 
molecules of the unstable autumn leaf is not immediately channelled into useful 
produ cts and processes , as it would be in an intact summer leaf. The weakened fall 
leaf then becomes vulnerable to the highly destructive effects of the oxygen creat ed 
by the excited chlorophyll molecules. 
H Even if you had never suspected that this is what was going on when leaves tum 
red, there are clues out there. One is straightforward : on many trees , the leaves that 
are the reddest are those on the side of the tree which gets most sun. Not only that, 
but the red is brighter on the upper side of the leaf. It has also been recognised for 
decades that the best conditions for intense red colours are dry, sunny days and cool 
nights , conditions that nicely match those that make leaves susceptible to excess 
light. And finally , trees such as maples usually get much redder the more north you 
travel in the northern hemisphere. It's colder ther e, they're more stres sed, their 
chlorophyll is more sens itive and it needs more SW\block. 
What is still not fully understood , however , is why some trees resort to producing 
red pigments while others don't bother, and simp ly reveal their orange or yellow 
hues. Do these trees have othe r means at their disposal to prevent overexposure to 
light in autumn? Their story , though not as spectacular to the eye, will surely turn 
out to be as subtle and as complex. 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 69 
Test 3 
Questions 14-18 
Reading Passage 2 has nine paragraphs , A-1. 
Which paragraph contains the following information? 
Write the correct letter, A- I, in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet . 
NB You may use any letter more than once. 
14 a description of the substance responsible for the red colouration of leaves 
15 the reason why trees drop their leaves in autumn 
16 some evidence to confirm a theory about the purpose of the red leaves 
17 an explanation of the function of chlorophyll 
18 a suggestion that the red colouration in leaves could serve as a warning signal 
Questions 19-22 
Complete the notes below. 
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 19-22 on your answer sheet. 
Why believe the 'light screen' hypothesis? 
• The most vividly coloured red leaves are found on the side of the tree facing the 
19 ...................... . 
• The 20 ...................... surfaces of leaves contain the most red pigment. 
• Red leaves are most abundant when daytime weather conditions are 21 ..................... . 
and sunny. 
• The intensity of the red colour of leaves increases as you go further 22 ...................... . 
70 APARINESH IBLTS House I WWW. IELTS - House . C!Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 23-25 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 2? 
In boxes 23-25 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
if the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
23 It is likely that the red pigments help to protect the leaf from freezing temperatures. 
24 The 'light screen' hypothesis would initially seem to contradict what is known about 
chlorophyll . 
25 Leaves which turn colours other than red are more likely to be damaged by 
sunlight. 
Question 26 
Choose the correct letter A, B, C or D. 
Write the correct letter in box 26 on your answer sheet. 
For which of the following questions does the writer offer an explanation? 
A why conifers remain green in winter 
B how leaves tum orange and yellow in autumn 
C how herbivorous insects choose which trees to lay their eggs in 
D why anthocyanins are restricted to certain trees 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 
71 
Test 3 
READING PASSAGE 3 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40 , which are based on Reading 
Passage 3 below. 
Beyond the blue horizon 
Ancient voyagers who settled the far-flung islands of the 
Pacific Ocean 
An important archaeological discovery on 
the island of ~fare in che Pacific archipelago 
of Vanuacu has revealed craces of an ancient 
seafaring people, che distant ancescors of coday's 
Polynesians. The sire came co light only by chance. 
An agricultural worker, digging in che grounds of 
a derelict plantation, scraped open a grave - che 
first of dozens in a burial ground some 3,000 
years old. It is che oldest cemetery ever found in che 
Pacific islands, and ic harbors che remains of an 
:rncienc peopl~ :m:h:ieologins call che Lapica. 
They were daring blue-water adventu rers 
who used basic canoes co rove across the ocean. 
Bue they were not just explorers. They were also 
pioneers who carried with chem everything chey 
would need co build new lives - their livestock, 
taro seedlings and scone tools. Within the span 
of several centuries, che Lapita screeched rhe 
boundaries of their world from che jungle-dad 
volcanoes of Papua New Guinea to chc loneliest 
coral oucliers of Tonga. 
The Lapita lefr precious few clues abouc 
themselves, but Eface expands the volume of data 
available co researchers dramatically. The remains 
of 62 individuals have been uncovered so far, 
and archacologiscs were also thrilled to find six 
complete Lapita pots. Other iccms included a 
l.apita burial urn with modeled birds arranged 
on che rim as though peering down at the human 
remains scaled inside. 'lc's an important discovery,' 
says Manhew Spriggs, professor of archaeology at 
the Auscralian National Universiry and head of 
72 
the international ream digging up the site, 'for ic 
conclusively identifies che remains as Lapica.' 
DNA ceased from these human remains may 
help answer one of che most puzzling questions in 
Pacific anthropology: did all Pacific islanders spring 
from one source or many? Was there onJy one 
oucward migration from a single point in Asia, or 
several from different poincs? 'This reprcsencs the 
best opporrunjry we've had yet,' says Spriggs, 'co 
find our who the Lapica actually were, where chcy 
came from, and who cheir closest descendants are 
coday.' 
There is one st ubborn question for which 
archaeology has yet to provide any answers: how 
did the l.apita accomplish che ancient equivalent 
of a moon landing, many times over? No-one 
has found one of their canoes or any rigging, 
which could reveal how the canoes were sailed. 
Nor do che oral hiscorics and rradirions of later 
Polynesians offer any insighcs, for rhey mm inco 
myths long before they reach as far back in rime 
as che Lapita. 
APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House .c:Ol'll 
'All we can say for certain is that the l..apita 
had canoes that were capable of ocean voyages, 
and they had the ability co sail chem,' says Geoff 
lrwin, a professor of archaeology ar the Univmity 
of Auckland. Those sailing skills, he says, were 
developed and ~ down over thousands of 
years by earlier mariners who worked thcir way 
through the archipelagocs of che western Pacific, 
making shorr crossings to nearby islands. The real 
advenrure didn't begin, however, uncil cheir l..apica 
descendants sailed out of sight of land, wich 
empty horizons on every side. This muse have 
been as difficult for chem as landing on the moon 
is for us coday. Certainly it distinguished them 
from their ancestors, but what gave chem the 
courage to launch out on such risky voyages? 
Reading 
easy. Vanuaru, for example, stretches more than 
500 miles in a norchwesc-southeasc crend, ics 
scores of incervisible islands forming a backstop 
for mariners riding the trade winds home. 
AJJ chis presupposes one essential detail, says 
Atholl Anderson, professor of prehistory at the 
Australian National University: che Lapita had 
mastered the advanced art of sailing against che 
wind. J\nd there's no proof chey could do any 
such thing,' Anderson says. 'There has been 
this assumption they did, and people have: built 
ca.noes to re-create: those early voyages based on chat 
assumption. Bur nobody has any idea what their 
canoes looked like or how they were rigged.' 
Rather than give all the credit ro human 
The Lapita's th ruse into the Pacific was skill, Anderson invokes the winds of chance. El 
eastward, against rhc: prevailing crade winds, Nmo, the same climate disruption that affects the 
Irwin notes. Those nagging headwinds, he argues, Pacific today, may have helped scatter the Lapira, 
may have been che key co their success. 'They Anderson suggests. He poincs our chat dimace dara 
could sail out for days into the unknown and assess obtained from slow-growing corals around the 
che area, secure: in the knowledge that if chc:y Pacific indicate a series of unusually frequenc El 
didn't find anything, rhey could turn about Ninos around the time of the Lapita expansion. By 
and catch a swift ride back on the trade winds. reversing the regular easr-co-wesr Row of the crade 
This is whar would have made che whole thing winds for weeks ac a time, these 'super El Ninos' 
work.' Once out there, skilled seafarers would might have ca.ken the Lapica on long unplanned 
have detected abundant leads co follow co land: voyages. 
seabirds, coconucs and twigs carried our co sea by H .L d.d . h . 
th ·d d h c. . owever u1cy 1 1c c e Lap1ca spread e ti cs, an r e anernoon pile-up of clouds on themsdvcs th· rd f ch ' · 
the horizon which often indicates an island in the th called~ I . ol' e way across the Pao fie, 
distance. en It quits ror reasons known only co 
chem. Ahead lay the vase emptiness of the ccnrral 
Pacific and perhaps they were coo thinly screeched 
ro venture farther. They probably never numbered 
more than a few thousand in total, and in cheir 
rapid migration eascward they encountered 
hund reds of islands - more rhan 300 in Fiji alone. 
For returning explorers. successful or not, the 
geography of rheir own archipelagoes would have 
provided a safety net. Without chis to go by, 
overshooting rheir home ports, getting lost and 
sailing off into eternity would have been all coo 
AFARINESH IELTS House I www.IELTS-House.com 73 
Test3 
Questions 27-31 
Complete the summary using the list of words and phrases, A-J, below. 
Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet. 
~ 
The Efate burial site 
A 3,000-year-old burial ground of a seafaring people called the Lapita has been found 
on an abandoned 27 ...................... on the Pacific island of ~fate . The cemetery, which is a 
significant 28 ...................... , was uncovered accidentally by an agricultural worker. 
The Lapita explored and colonised many Pacific islands over several centuries. They 
took many things with them on their voyages including 29 ...................... and tools. 
The burial ground increases the amount of information about the Lapita available to 
scientists . A team of researchers , led by Matthew Spriggs from the Australian National 
University, are helping with the excavation of the site. Spriggs believes the 30 .................... .. 
which was found at the site is very important since it confirms that the 31 ...................... found 
inside are Lapita. 
A proof 
B plantation 
C harbour 
0 bones 
E data 
F archaeological discovery 
G burial urn 
H source 
animals 
J maps 
74 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 32-35 
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. 
Write the correct letter in boxes 32- 35 on your answer sheet . 
32 According to the writer, there are difficulties explaining how the Lapita 
accomplished their journeys because 
A the canoes that have been discovered offer relatively few clues . 
B archaeologists have shown limited interest in this area of research. 
C little information relating to this period can be relied upon for accuracy. 
D technological advances have altered the way such achievements are viewed . 
33 According to the sixth paragraph, what was extraordinary about the Lapita? 
A They sailed beyond the point where land was visible . 
B Their cultural heritage discouraged the expression of fear. 
C They were able to build canoes that withstood ocean voyages . 
D Their navigational skills were passed on from one generation to the next. 
34 What does 'This' refer to in the seventh paragraph? 
A the Lapita's seafaring talent 
B the Lapita's ability to detect signs of land 
C the Lapita's extensive knowledge of the region 
D the Lapita's belief they would be able to return home 
35 According to the eighth paragraph , how was the geography of the region 
significant? 
A It played an important role in Lapita culture . 
B It meant there were relatively few storms at sea. 
C It provided a navigational aid for the Lapita. 
D It made a large number of islands habitable . 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 75 
Test 3 
Questions 36-40 
Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3? 
In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write 
YES 
NO 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the views of the writer 
if the statement contradicts the views of the writer 
if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this 
36 It is now clear that the Lapita could sail into a prevailing wind . 
37 Extreme climate conditions may have played a role in Lapita migration . 
38 The Lapita learnt to predict the duration of El Ninos. 
39 It remains unclear why the Lapita halted their expansion across the Pacific . 
40 It is likely that the majority of Lapita settled on Fiji. 
76 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 