Test4 
READING 
READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1- 13, which are based on 
Reading Passage 1 below. 
The megafires of California 
Drought, housing expansion, and oversupply of tinder make for 
bigger, hotter fires in the westem United States 
Wildfires are becoming an increasing 
menace in the western United States, 
with Southern California being the 
hardest hit area . There's a reason fire 
squads battling more frequ ent blazes 
in Southern Califo rnia are having such 
difficulty containing the flames, desp ite 
better preparedness than ever and 
decades of experience fighting fires 
fanned by the 'Santa Ana Winds'. The 
wildfires themselves , experts say, are 
generally hotter, faster, and spread more 
erratically than in the past . 
Megafires , also called 'siege fires ', 
are the increasingly frequent blazes that 
burn 500,000 acres or more - 10 times 
the size of the average forest fire of 20 
years ago . Some recent wildfires are 
among the biggest ever in California in 
terms of acreage burned , according to 
state figures and news reports . 
One explanation for the trend to 
more superhot fires is that the region, 
which usually has dry summers, has had 
significantly below normal precipitation 
in many recent years . Another reason , 
experts say, is related to the century ­
long policy of the US Forest Service to 
stop wildfires as quickly as possible . 
The unintentional consequence has 
been to halt the natural eradication of 
underbrush, now the primary fuel for 
megafires. 
Three other factor s contribute to the 
trend , they add. First is climate change, 
marked by a 1-degr ee Fahrenheit rise in 
average yearly temperature across the 
western states. Second is fire seasons 
that on average are 78 days longer 
than they were 20 years ago. Third 
is increased co nstructi on of homes in 
wooded areas. 
'We are increasingly building our 
homes in fire-prone ecosys tems ,' says 
Dominik Kulakowski , adjunct professor 
of biology at Clark University Graduate 
School of Geography in Worcester , 
Massachusetts . 'Doing that in many 
of the forests of the western US is like 
building homes on the side of an active 
volcano .' 
In California, where population 
growth has averaged more than 600,000 
a year for at least a decade, more 
resident ial housing is being built . 'What 
once was open space is now residential 
homes providing fuel to make fires 
bum with greater intensity,' says Terry 
McHale of the California Department 
of Forestry firefighters ' union. 'With so 
88 AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 
much dryness, so many communities 
to catch fire, so many fronts to fight, it 
becomes an almost incredible job.• 
That said, many experts give 
California high marks for making 
progress on preparedness in recent 
years, after some of the largest fires 
in state history scorched thousands 
of acres, burned thousands of homes, 
and killed numerous people. Stung in 
the past by criticism of bungling that 
allowed fires to spread when they 
might have been contained, personnel 
are meeting the peculiar challenges of 
neighborhood - and canyon- hopping 
fires better than previously, observers 
say. 
State promises to provide more 
up-to-date engines, planes, and 
helicopters to fight fires have been 
fulfilled . Firefighters ' unions that in 
the past complained of dilapidated 
equipment , old fire engines , and 
insufficient blueprints for fire safety are 
now praising the state's commitment, 
noting that funding for firefighting has 
increased, despite huge cuts in many 
other programs . 'We are pleased that 
the current state administration has 
been very proactive in its support of us, 
and [has) come through with budgetary 
support of the infrastructure needs we 
have long sought ,' says Mr. McHale of 
the firefighters ' union . 
Besides providing money to upgrade 
the fire engines that must traverse 
the mammoth state and wind along 
serpentine canyon roads , the state has 
Reading 
invested in better command-and-control 
facilities as well as in the strategies 
to run them . 'In the fire sieges of 
earlier years , we found that other 
jurisdictions and states were willing 
to offer mutual-aid help, but we were 
not able to communicate adequately 
with them ,' says Kim Zagaris, chief 
of the state 's Office of Emergency 
Services Fire and Rescue Branch . 
After a commission examined and 
revamped communications procedures, 
the statewide response 'has become 
far more professional and responsive,' 
he says. There is a sense among both 
government officials and residents that 
the speed, dedication, and coordination 
of firefighters from several states and 
jurisdictions are resulting in greater 
efficiency than in past 'siege fire' 
situations . 
In recent years, the Southern 
California region has improved building 
codes , evacuation procedures, and 
procurement of new technology. 'I 
am extraordinarily impressed by the 
improvements we have witnessed,' says 
Randy Jacobs , a Southern Califomia­
based lawyer who has had to evacuate 
both his home and business to escape 
wildfires . 'Notwithstanding all the 
damage that will continue to be caused 
by wildfires, we will no longer suffer the 
loss of life endured in the past because 
of the fire prevention and firefighting 
measures that have been put in place,' 
he says. 
AFARINESH IBLTS House I www.IBLTS-House .com 89 
Test4 
Questions 1-6 
Complete the notes below. 
Choose ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet. 
90 
Wildfires 
• Characteristics of wildfires and wildfire conditions today compared to the past: 
- occurrence : more frequent 
- temperatur e: hotter 
- speed: faster 
- movement: 1 ...................... more unpredictably 
- size of fires: 2 ...................... greater on average than two decades ago 
• Reasons wildfires cause more damage today compared to the past: 
- rainfall: 3 ...................... average 
- more brush to act as 4 ..................... . 
- increase in yearly temperature 
- extended fire 5 ..................... . 
- more building of 6 ...................... in vulnerable places 
APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 7-13 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1? 
In boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the informat ion 
if the statement contrad icts the informat ion 
if there is no infonnation on this 
7 The amount of open space in California has diminished over the last ten years . 
8 Many experts believe California has made little progress in readying itself to 
fight fires. 
9 Personnel in the past have been criticised for mishandling fire containment. 
10 California has replaced a range of firefighting tools. 
11 More firefighters have been hired to improve fire-fighting capacity . 
12 Citizens and government groups disapprove of the efforts of different states and 
agencies working together. 
13 Randy Jacobs believes that loss of life from fires will continue at the same levels, 
despite changes made. 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 91 
Tesf 4 
READING PASSAGE 2 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading 
Passage 2 below. 
Second nature 
Your personality isn't necessarily set in stone. With a little experimentation, 
people can reshape their ten1peraments and inject passion, optimism, joy and 
courage into their lives 
A Psychologists have long held that a person 's character canno t undergo a 
tran sformati on in any meaningful way and that the key trait s of personality are 
determined at a very young age. However, resea rchers hav e begun looking more 
closely at ways we can change. Positive psychologi sts have identified 24 qualitie s 
we admire , suc h as loyalty and kindness, and are studying them to find out why 
they come so naturally to some people. What they'r e discovering is that many of 
these qualities amo unt to habitual behaviour that determines the way we respond 
to the world . The good news is that all this can be learned. 
Some qualities are less challenging to develop than others, optimism being one of 
them. However, developing qualities requires mastering a range of skills which are 
diverse and sometimes surprising. For example, to bring more joy and passion into 
you r life, you must be open to experiencing negative emotions. Cultivating such 
quali ties wiU help you realise your full potential . 
B 'The evidence is good that most personality traits can be altered,' says Christopher 
Peterson, professor of psychology at the University of Michigan , who cites himself 
as an example. lnherently introverted, he realised early on that as an academic, 
his reticence would prove disa strous in the lecture hall. So he learned to be 
more outgoing and to entertain his classes. 'Now my ext roverted behaviour is 
spontaneous,' he says. 
C David Fajgenbaum had to make a similar transition . He was preparing for 
university, when he had an accident that put an end to his sports career. On 
campus, he quickly found that beyond ordinary cou nselling, the university had no 
services for student s who were undergoing physical rehabi litation and sufferin g 
from depression Jike him . He therefore launched a support group to help others in 
simi lar situation s. He took action despite his own pain - a typical response of an 
optimist. 
O Suzanne Segerstrom, profes sor of psychology at the Univer sity of Kentucky, 
believes that the key to increa sing optimism is through cul tivating optim istic 
behaviour, rather than positive thinking. She recommends you train yourself to pay 
attention to good fortune by writing down three positive things that come about 
each day. This will help you convince yourseU that favourable outcomes actually 
happen all the time, making it easie r to begin taking action. 
92 APARINESH IBLTS House I WWW. IELTS-House. C!Ol'll 
Reading 
E You can recognise a person who is passionate about a pursuit by the way they 
are so strongly involved in it. Tanya Streeter's passion is freediving - the sport 
of plunging deep into the water without tanks or other breathing equipment. 
Beginning in 1998, she set nine world records and can hold her breath for 
six minutes . The physical stamina required for this sport is intense but the 
psychological demands are even more overwhelming. Streeter learned to untan gle 
her fears from her judgment of what her body and mind could do. 'In my career 
as a competitive freediver, there was a limit to what I could do - but it wasn 't 
anywhere near what I thought it was,' she says. 
F Finding a pursuit that excites you can improve anyone 's life. The secret about 
consuming passions , though, according to psychologi st Paul Silvia of the 
University of North Carolina, is that 'they require discipline, hard work and ability, 
which is why they are so rewarding.' Psychologist Todd Kashdan has this advice 
for those people taking up a new passion: 'As a newcomer, you also have to tolerate 
and laugh at your own ignorance. You must be willing to accept the negat ive 
feelings that come your way,' he says. 
G In 2004, physician-scientist Mau ro Zappaterra began his PhD research at Harvard 
Medical School. Unfortunately, he was miserable as his research wasn't compa tible 
with his curiosity about healing. He finally took a break and during eigh t months 
in Santa Fe, Zappaterra learned about alternative healing techniques not taught 
at Harvard . When he got back, he switched labs to study how cerebrospinal fluid 
nourishes the developing nervou s system. He also vowed to look for the joy in 
everything, including failure, as this could help him learn about his research and 
himself . 
One thing that can hold joy back is a person's concentratio n on avoiding failure 
rather than their looking forward to doing something well. 'Focusing on being safe 
might get in the way of your reaching your goals,' explains Kashdan. For example, 
are you hoping to get through a business lunch with out emba rrassing yourself, or 
are you thinking about how fascinating the conversation might be? 
H Usually, we think of courage in physical terms but ordinary life demands 
something else. For marketing executive Kenneth Pedeleo se, it meant speaking 
out against some thing he thought was ethically wrong. The new manager was 
intimidatin g staff so Pedeleose carefully recorded each instance of bullying and 
even tually took the evidence to a serdor director, knowing his own job security 
would be threatened . Eventually the manager was the one to go. According to 
Cynthia Pury, a psychologist at Clemson Uruversity, Pedeleose' s story proves the 
point that courage is not motivated by fearlessness, but by moral obligatio n. Pury 
also believes that people can acquire courage. Many of her students said that faced 
with a risky situation, they first tried to calm themselv es down, then looked for a 
way to mitigate the danger , just as Pedeleose did by documenting his allegations. 
Over the long term, picking up a new character trait may help you move toward 
being the person you want to be. And in the short term, the effort itself could be 
surpri singly rewarding, a kind of internal adventure . 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 93 
Test4 
Questions 14-18 
Complete the summary below. 
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet. 
Psychologists have traditionally believed that a personal ity 14 ...................... was impossible 
and that by a 15 ......... _ ............ a person 's character tends to be fixed . This is not true 
according to positive psycholog ists, who say that our personal qualities can be seen 
as habitual behaviour . One of the easiest qualities to acquire is 16 ...................... . However . 
regardless of the quality, it is necessary to learn a wide variety of different 17 ..................... . 
in order for a new quality to develop; for example, a person must understand and feel 
some 18 ...................... in order to increase their happiness . 
94 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 
Reading 
Questions 19-22 
Look at the following statements (Questions 19-22) and the list of people below. 
Match each statement with the correct person, A- G. 
Write the correct letter, A- G, in boxes 19-22 on your answer sheet. 
19 People must accept that they do not know much when first trying something new. 
20 It is important for people to actively notice when good things happen . 
21 Courage can be learned once its origins in a sense of responsibility are understood . 
22 It is possible to overcome shyness when faced with the need to speak in public. 
List of People 
A Christopher Peterson 
B David Fajgenbaum 
c Suzanne Segerstrom 
D Tanya Streeter 
E Todd Kashdan 
F Kenneth Pedeleose 
G Cynthia Pury 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse . com 95 
Test4 
Questions 23-26 
Reading Passage 2 has eight sections, A-H . 
Which section contains the following information? 
Write the correct letter, A- H, in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet. 
23 a mention of how rational thinking enabled someone to achieve physical goals 
24 an account of how someone overcame a sad experience 
25 a description of how someone decided to rethink their academic career path 
26 an example of how someone risked his career out of a sense of duty 
96 AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 3 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40 , which are based on Reading 
Passage 3 below. 
When evolution runs backwards 
Evolution isn't supposed to run backwards - yet an increasing number 
of examples show that it does and that it can sometimes represent the 
future of a species 
The description of any animal as an 
'evolutionary throwback' Is controversial. 
For the better part of a century, most 
biologists have been reluctant to use those 
words, mindful of a principle of evolution 
that says 'evolution cannot run backwards '. 
But as more and more examples come to 
light and modern genetics enters the scene, 
that principle is having to be rewritten. Not 
only are evolutionary throwbacks possible, 
they sometimes play an important role in the 
forward march of evolution. 
The technical term for an evolutionary 
throwback is an 'atavism', from the Latin 
atavus, meaning forefather. The word has 
ugly connotations thanks largely to Cesare 
Lombroso, a 19th-century Italian medic who 
argued that criminals were born not made 
and could be identified by certain physical 
features that were throwbacks to a primitive, 
sub-human state. 
in terms of probability, stating that there is no 
reason why evolution cannot run backwards 
- it is just very unlikely. And so the idea of 
irreversibility In evolution stuck and came to 
be known as 'Dollo's law'. 
If Dollo's law is right, atavisms should 
occur only very rarely, 1f at all. Yet almost 
since the idea took root, except ions have 
been cropping up. In 1919, for example, 
a humpback whale with a pair of leg-like 
appendages over a metre long, complete 
with a full set of limb bones, was caught 
off Vancouver Island in Canada. Explorer 
Roy Chapman Andrews argued at the time 
that the whale must be a throwback to a 
land-living ancestor. 'I can see no other 
explanation,' he wrote in 1921 . 
Since then, so many other examples 
have been discovered that it no longer 
makes sense to say that evolution is as good 
as irreversible. And this poses a puzzle: 
While Lombroso was measuring how can characteristics that disappeared 
criminals, a Belgian palaeontologist called millions of years ago sudden ly reappear? 
Louis Dolio was studying fossil records In 1994, Rudolf Raft and colleagues at 
and coming to the opposite conclusion. Indiana University in the USA decided 
In 1890 he proposed that evolution was to use genetics to put a number on the 
irreversible: that 'an organism is unable to probability of evolution going into reverse. 
return, even partially, to a previous stage They reasoned that while some evolutionary 
already realised in the ranks of its ancestors'. changes involve the loss of genes and are 
Early 20th-century biologists came to a therefore irreversible, others may be the 
similar conclusion, though they qualified it result of genes being switched off. If these 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 97 
Test 4 
silent genes are somehow switched back 
on, they argued, long-lost traits could 
reappear. 
history of a group of South American lizards 
called Bachia. Many of these have minuscule 
limbs; some look more like snakes than 
lizards and a few have completely lost the 
Raff's team went on to calculate the toes on their hind limbs. Other species, 
likelihood of it happening. Silent genes however, sport up to four toes on their 
accumulate random mutations, they hind legs. The simplest explanation is that 
reasoned, eventually rendering them useless. the toed lineages never lost their toes, 
So how long can a gene suNive in a species but Wagner begs to differ. According to 
if it is no longer used? The team calculated his analysis of the Bachia family tree, the 
that there is a good chance of silent genes toed species re-evolved toes from toeless 
suNMng for up to 6 million years in at least ancestors and, what is more. digit loss 
a few individuals in a population, and that and gain has occurred on more than one 
some might suNive as long as 1 O million occasion over tens of millions of years. 
years. In other words. throwbacks are 
possible, but only to the relatively recent 
evolutionary past. 
As a possible example, the team pointed 
to the mole salamanders of Mexico and 
California. Like most amphibians these 
begin life in a juvenile 'tadpole' state, then 
metamorphose into the adult form - except 
for one species, the axolotl, which famously 
lives its entire life as a juvenile. The simplest 
explanation for this is that the axolotl lineage 
alone lost the ability to metamorphose, while 
others retained it. From a detailed analysis 
of the salamanders' family tree, however, 
it is clear that the other lineages evolved 
from an ancestor that itself had lost the 
ability to metamorphose. In other words. 
metamorphosis in mole salamanders is an 
atavism. The salamander example fits with 
Raff's 10-million-year time frame. 
More recently, however, examples have 
been reported that break the time limit, 
suggesting that silent genes may not be the 
whole story. In a paper published last year, 
biologist Gunter Wagner of Yale University 
reported some work on the evolutionary 
So what's going on? One possibility is 
that these traits are lost and then simply 
reappear, In much the same way that 
similar structures can independently arise 
in unrelated species, such as the dorsal 
fins of sharks and killer whales. Another 
more intriguing possibility is that the genetic 
information needed to make toes somehow 
suNived for tens or perhaps hundreds of 
millions of years in the lizards and was 
reactivated . These atavistic traits provided 
an advantage and spread through the 
population, effectively reversing evolution. 
But if silent genes degrade within 6 to 
1 O million years, how can long-lost traits 
be reactivated over longer timescales? The 
answer may lie in the womb. Early embryos 
of many species develop ancestral f ea tu res. 
Snake embryos, for example, sprout hind 
limb buds. Later in development these 
features disappear thanks to developmental 
programs that say 'lose the leg'. If for any 
reason this does not happen, the ancestral 
feature may not disappear, leading to an 
atavism. 
98 AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 
Reading 
Questions 27- 31 
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. 
Write the correct letter in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet. 
27 When discussing the theory developed by Louis Dollo, the writer says that 
A it was immediately referred to as Dollo's law. 
B it supported the possibility of evolutionary throwbacks . 
C it was modified by biologists in the early twentieth century. 
D it was based on many years of research. 
28 The humpback whale caught off Vancouver Island is mentioned because of 
A the exceptional size of its body. 
B the way it exemplifies Dollo's law. 
C the amount of local controversy it caused. 
D the reason given for its unusual features. 
29 What is said about 'silent genes'? 
A Their numbers vary according to species. 
B Raff disagreed with the use of the term. 
C They could lead to the re-emergence of certain characteristics. 
D They can have an unlimited life span. 
30 The writer mentions the mole salamander because 
A it exemplifies what happens in the development of most amphibians . 
B it suggests that Raff's theory is correct. 
C it has lost and regained more than one ability. 
D its ancestors have become the subject of extensive research. 
31 Which of the following does Wagner claim? 
A Members of the Bachia lizard family have lost and regained certain features 
several times. 
B Evidence shows that the evolution of the Bachia lizard is due to the 
environment. 
C His research into South American lizards supports Raff's assertions. 
D His findings will apply to other species of South American lizards. 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 99 
Test 4 
Questions 32-36 
Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-G, below. 
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 32- 36 on your answer sheet. 
32 For a long time biologists rejected 
33 Opposing views on evolutionary throwbacks are represented by 
34 Examples of evolutionary throwbacks have led to 
35 The shark and killer whale are mentioned to exemplify 
36 One explanation for the findings of Wagner's research is 
A the question of how certain long-lost traits could reappear. 
B the occurrence of a particular feature in different species. 
C parallels drawn between behaviour and appearance. 
D the continued existence of certain genetic information. 
E the doubts felt about evolutionary throwbacks. 
F the possibility of evolution being reversible. 
G Dollo's findings and the convictions held by Lombroso. 
Questions 37-40 
Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3? 
In boxes 37- 40 on your answer sheet, write 
YES 
NO 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statemen t agrees with the claims of the writer 
if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer 
if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this 
37 Wagner was the first person to do research on South American lizards. 
38 Wagner believes that Bachia lizards with toes had toeless ancestors. 
39 The temporary occurrence of long-lost traits in embryos is rare. 
40 Evolutionary throwbacks might be caused by developmental problems in the womb. 
100 AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse. com 