Reading 
READING 
READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1- 13, which are based on Reading 
Passage 1 on the following pages. 
Questions 1- 7 
Reading Passage 1 has seven paragraphs, A-G . 
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below. 
Write the correct number, I-ix , in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
List of Headings 
The search for the reasons for an increase in population 
Ii Industrialisation and the fear of unemployment 
Ill The development of cities in Japan 
Iv The time and place of the lndustrial Revolution 
v The cases of Holland, France and China 
vi Changes in drinking habits in Britain 
vtl Two keys to Britain's industrial revolution 
viii Conditions required for industrialisation 
Ix Comparisons with Japan lead to the answer 
Paragraph A 
Paragraph B 
Paragraph C 
Paragraph D 
Paragraph E 
Paragraph F 
Paragraph G 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse . com 
41 
Test 2 
Tea and the Industrial Revolution 
A Cambridge professor says that a change in drinking habits was the reason for 
the Industrial Revolution in Britain. Anjana Ahuja reports 
A Alan Macfarlane, professor of anthropolog ical science at King's College, Cambridge, has, like 
ocher historians, spent decades wrestling with the enigma of the Industrial Revolution . Why 
did this particular Big Bang - the world-changing birth of industry - happen in Britain? And 
why did it strike at the end of the 18th century? 
B Macfarlane compares che puzzle co a combination lock. 'There are abouc 20 different 
factors and all of chem need co be present before the revolution can happen.' he says. For 
industry to cake off, there needs to be the technology and power to drive factories, large 
urban populations to provide cheap labour, easy transport to move goods around, an 
affluent middle-class willing to buy mass-produced objects, a market -driven economy and 
a political system chat allows this to happen. While chis was the case for England, other 
nations, such as Japan, the Netherlands and France also met some of these criter ia but were 
not industrialising. 'AJI these factors must have been necessary buc not sufficient co cause che 
revolution,' says Macfarlane. '.After all, Holland had everything except coal, while China also 
had many of these factors. Mose historians are convinced there are one or cwo missing factors 
that you need co open the lock.' 
C The missing factors, he proposes, are to be found in almost every kitchen cupboard. Tea and 
beer, cwo of the nation's favourite drinks, fuelled the revolution. The antiseptic properties 
of cannin, rhe active ingredient in tea, and of hops in beer - plus the fact chat both are 
made with boiled water - allowed urban communities to flour ish at close quarte rs without 
succumbing co water-borne diseases such as dysentery. The theory sounds eccentric bur once 
he starts co explain the detective work that went into his deduction , the scepticism gives 
way to wary admiration . Macfarlane's case has been strengthened by support from notable 
quarters - Roy Porter, the distinguished medical historian , recently wrote a favourable 
appraisal of his research. 
D Macfarlane had wondered for a long time how the Industrial Revolution came about. 
Historians had alighted on one interesting factor around the mid-18th centu ry that required 
explanation. Between about 1650 and 1740, the population in Britain was static. But then 
there was a burst in population growth. Macfarlane says: 'The infant mortality rate halved 
in the space of 20 years, and this happened in borh rural areas and cities, and across all 
classes. People suggested four possible causes. Was there a sudden change in che viruses and 
bacteria around? Unlikely. Was there a revolution in medical science? But this was a century 
before Lister's revolution*. Was there a change in environmental conditions? There were 
improvements in agriculture that wiped out malaria, bur these were small gains. Sanitation 
did not become widespread until the 19th century. The only option left is food. Bur the 
height and weight statistics show a decline. So the food must have got worse. Efforts to 
explain this sudden reduction in child deaths appeared to draw a blank.' 
•Joseph Llncr was die flm doaor ro use an~ptic rcchniqucs during surgical operations to prevent infections. 
42 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
E This population burst seemed co happen at just the right time co provide labour for the 
Industrial Revolution . 'When you start moving cowards an industrial revolution, it is 
economically efficient ro have people living close together,' says Macfarlane. 'Bue then you 
gee disease, particularly from human waste.' Some digging around in historical records 
revealed chat there was a change in the incidence of water-borne disease at char time , 
especially dysentery. Macfarlane deduce d that whatever the British were drinking muse have 
been important in regulating disease. He says, 'We drank beer. For a long time, the English 
were protected by the strong antibacterial agent in hops, which were added to help preserve 
the beer. Bue in the lace 17th century a taX was introduced on male, the basic ingredienr of 
beer. The poor curned to water and gin and in the 1720s the mortality rate began co rise 
agafo. Then it suddenly dropped again. What caused chis?' 
F Macfarlane looked co Japan, which was also devdoping large cities about the same ri me, 
and also had no sanitation. Water-borne diseases bad a much looser grip on the Japan ese 
population than chose in Britain. Could it be the prevalence of tea in their culture? 
Macfarlane then noted that the history of cea in Britain provided an extraordinary 
coincidence of daces. Tea was relatively expensive until Britain scarred a direct clippe r trade 
with Ch ina in the early l 8th century. By the 17 40s, about the time that infant mortality 
was dipping, the drink was commo n. Macfarlane guessed chat the face chat water had co 
be boiled, together with the stomach- purifyin g properties of tea meant char the breast 
milk provided by mothers was healthier than it had ever been . No ocher European nation 
sipped tea like the British, which , by Macfarlane 's logic, pushed these ocher countri es out of 
contention for the revolution. 
G Bue, if cea is a factor in the combination lock, why didn't Japan forge ahead in a tea-soaked 
indu strial revolution of its own? Macfarlane notes that even though 17th-ce ntury Japan had 
large cities, high literacy races, even a futures market, it had turned its back on the essence 
of any work-based revolution by giving up labour-saving devices such as animals, afraid chat 
they would put people out of work. So, the nation that we now think of as one of the most 
technologicaUy advanced entered the 19th century having 'abandoned the wheel'. 
43 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 
Test 2 
Questions 8-13 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1? 
In boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
if the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
8 China's transport system was not suitable for industry in the 18th century . 
9 Tea and beer both helped to prevent dysentery in Britain. 
10 Roy Porter disagrees with Professor Macfarlane 's findings. 
11 After 1740, there was a reduction in population in Britain. 
12 People in Britain used to make beer at home. 
13 The tax on malt indirectly caused a rise in the death rate. 
44 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse . com 
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 2 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on 
Reading Passage 2 below. 
A 
B 
c 
Gifted children and learning 
Internationally, 'giftedness' is most frequently determined by a score on a 
general intelligence test, known as an IQ test, which is above a chosen cut-
off point, usually at around the top 2-5%. Children's educational environment 
contributes to the IQ score and the way intelligence is used. For example, 
a very close positive relationship was found when children's IQ scores were 
compared with their home educational provision (Freeman, 2010). The higher 
the children's IQ scores, especially over IQ 130, the better the quality of their 
educational backup, measured in terms of reported verbal interactions with 
parents, number of books and activities in their home etc . Because 10 tests are 
decidedly influenced by what the child has learned, they are to some extent 
measures of current achievement based on age-norms; that is, how well the 
children have learned to manipulate their knowledge and know -how within the 
terms of the test. The vocabulary aspect , for example, is dependent on having 
heard those words. But IQ tests can neither ident ify the processes of learning 
and thinking nor predict creativity. 
Excellence does not emerge without appropriate help. To reach an 
exceptionally high standard in any area very able children need the means to 
learn, which includes material to work with and focused challenging tuition 
- and the encouragement to follow their dream. There appears to be a 
qualitative difference in the way the intellectually highly able think, compared 
with more average -ability or older pupils, for whom external regulation by the 
teacher often compensates for lack of internal regulation. To be at their most 
effective in their self-regulation, all children can be helped to identify their own 
ways of learning - metacognition - which will include strategies of planning, 
monitoring, evaluation, and choice of what to learn. Emotional awareness is 
also part of rnetacognition, so children should be helped to be aware of their 
feelings around the area to be learned, feelings of curiosity or confidence, for 
example . 
High achievers have been found to use self-regulatory learning strategies 
more often and more effectively than lower achievers, and are better able to 
transfer these strategies to deal with unfam iliar tasks. This happens to such a 
high degree in some children that they appear to be demonstrating talent in 
particular areas. Overviewing research on the thinking process of highly able 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 45 
Test 2 
~ E 
46 
children, (Shore and Kanevsky, 1993) put the instructor's problem succinctly: 
'If they [the gifted] merely think more quickly, then we need only teach more 
quickly. If they merely make fewer errors, then we can shorten the practice'. But 
of course, this is not entirely the case; adjustments have to be made in methods 
of learning and teaching, to take account of the many ways individuals think. 
Yet in order to learn by themselves, the gifted do need some support from their 
teachers. Conversely, teachers who have a tendency to 'overdirect' can diminish 
their gifted pupils' learning autonomy: Although 'spoon-feeding' can produce 
extremely high examination results, these are not always followed by equally 
impressive life successes. Too much dependence on the teacher risks loss of 
autonomy and motivation to discover. However, when teachers help pupils to 
reflect on their own learning and thinking activities, they increase their pupils' 
self-regulation. For a young child, it may be just the simple question 'What have 
you learned today?' which helps thern to recognise what they are doing. Given 
that a fundamental goal of education is to transfer the control of learning from 
teachers to pupils, improving pupils' ~earning to learn techniques should be a 
major outcome of the school experience, especially for the highly competent. 
There are quite a number of new methods which can help, such as child­
initiated learning, ability-peer tutoring, etc. Such practices have been found to 
be particularly useful for bright children from deprived areas. 
But scientific progress is not all theoretical, knowledge is also vital to 
outstanding performance: individuals who know a great deal about a specific 
domain will achieve at a higher level than those who do not (Elshout, 1995). 
Research with creative scientists by S1monton (1988) brought him to the 
conclusion that above a certain high level, characteristics such as independence 
seemed to contribute more to reaching the highest levels of expertise than 
intellectual skills, due to the great demands of effort and time needed for 
learning and practice. Creativity in all forms can be seen as expertise mixed 
with a high level of motivation (Weisberg, 1993). 
To sum up, learning is affected qy emotions of both the individual and 
significant others. Positive emotions facilitate the creative aspects of learning 
and negative emotions inhibit it. Fear, for example 1 cah limit the development 
of curiosity, which is a strong force in scientific advance, because it motivates 
problem-solving behaviour. In Boekaerts' (1991) review of emotion in the 
learning of very high IQ and highly achieving children, she found emotional 
forces in harness. They were not only curious, but often had a strong desire to 
control their environment, improve their learning efficiency, and increase their 
own learning resources. 
APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House .c:Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 14-17 
Reading Passage 2 has six paragraphs , A- F. 
Which paragraph contains the following information? 
Write the correct letter, A- F, in boxes 14-17 on your answer sheet. 
NB You may use any letter more than once. 
14 a reference to the influence of the domestic background on the gifted child 
15 reference to what can be lost if learners are given too much guidance 
16 a reference to the damaging effects of anxiety 
17 examples of classroom techniques which favour socially-disadvantaged children 
Questions 18-22 
Look at the following statements (Questions 1 ~22) and the list of people below. 
Match each statement with the correct person or people, A- E. 
Write the correct letter, A- E, in boxes 1 ~22 on your answer sheet. 
18 Less time can be spent on exercises with gifted pupils who produce accurate work . 
19 Self-reliance is a valuable tool that helps gifted students reach their goals. 
20 Gifted children know how to channel their feelings to assist their learning. 
21 The very gifted child benefits from appropriate support from close relatives. 
22 Really successful students have learnt a considerable amount about their subject. 
List of People 
A Freeman 
B Shore and Kanevsky 
c El shout 
D Simonton 
E Boekaert s 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse . com 47 
Test2 
Questions 23-26 
Complete the sentences below. 
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet. 
23 One study found a strong connection between children 's IQ and the availability 
of ...................... and ... -................. at home . 
24 Children of average ability seem to need more direction from teachers because 
they do not have ...................... . 
25 Metacognition involves children understanding their own learning strategies, as well 
as developing ...................... . 
26 Teachers who rely on what is known as ...................... often produce sets of impressive 
grades in class tests. 
48 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 3 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40 , which are based on Reading 
Passage 3 below. 
Museums of fine art and their public 
The fact that people go to the Louvre museum in 
Paris to see the origina l painting Mona Lisa when 
they can see a reproduction anywhere leads us 
to question some assumptions about the role of 
museums of fine art in today's world 
One of the most famous works of art in 
the world is Leonardo da Vin ci's Mona 
Lisa. Nearly everyone who goes to see the 
original will already be familiar with it from 
reproductions, but they accept that fine art 
is more rewardin gly viewed in its original 
form. 
However, if Mona Lisa was a famous 
novel, few people would bother to 
go to a museum to read the writer 's 
actual manuscript rather than a printed 
reproduction. This might be explained by 
the fact that the novel has evolved precisely 
because of technological developments 
that made it possible to print out huge 
numbers of texts, whereas oil paintings have 
always been produced as unique objects. In 
addition , it could be argued that the practice 
of interpreting or 'reading' each medium 
follows differenl convention s. With novels, 
the reader attends mainly to the meaning of 
words rather than the way they are printed 
on the page, whereas the 'reader' of a 
painting must attend just as closely to the 
material form of marks and shapes in the 
picture as to any ideas they may signify. 
Yet it has always been possible to make 
very accurate facsimiles of pretty well any 
fine art work. The seven surviving versions 
of Mona Lisa bear witness to the fact that 
in the 16th century, artists seemed perfectly 
content to assign 
the reproduction 
of their creations 
to their workshop 
apprentices as 
regular 'bread and butter' work. And 
today the task of reproducing picture s is 
incomparably more simple and reliable , 
with reprographic techniques that allow 
the production of high -quality prints made 
exactly to the original scale, with faithful 
colour values, and even with duplication of 
the surface relief of the painting. 
But despite an implicit recognition that 
the spread of good reproductions can be 
culturally valuable, museums continue to 
promote the special status of original work. 
Unfortunately, this seems to place severe 
limitations on the kind of experience offered 
to visitors. 
One limitation is related to the way the 
museum presents its exhibits. As repositori es 
of unique histori cal objects, art museums 
are often called 'treasure houses'. We are 
reminded of this even before we view 
a collection by the presence of security 
guards, attendants, ropes and display cases 
to keep us away from the exhib its. In many 
cases, the architectural style of the building 
further reinforces that notion. In additio n, 
a major collect ion like that of London's 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 49 
Test 2 
National Gallery is housed in numerous 
rooms, each with dozens of works, any 
one of which is likely to be worth more 
than all the average visitor possesses. In a 
society that judges the personal status of the 
individual so much by their material worth , 
it is therefore difficult not to be impressed by 
one's own relative 'worthlessness' in such an 
environment. 
Furthermore, consideration of the 'value' 
of the original work in its treasure house 
setting impresses upon the viewer that, 
since these works were originally produced, 
they have been assigned a huge monetary 
value by some person or institution more 
powerful than themselves. Evidently, 
nothing the viewer thinks about the work 
is going to alter that value, and so today
1
s 
viewer is deterred from trying to extend that 
spontaneous, immediate, self-reliant kind of 
reading which would originally have met the 
work. 
The visitor may then be struck by the 
strangeness of seeing such diverse paintings, 
drawings and sculptures brought together 
in an environment for which they were not 
originally created. This 'displacement effect' 
is further heightened by the sheer volume of 
exhibits. In the case of a major collection, 
there are probably more works on display 
than we could realistically view in weeks or 
even months. 
This is particularly distressing because 
time seems to be a vital factor in the 
appreciation of all art forms. A fundamental 
difference between paintings and other art 
forms is that there is no prescribed time 
over which a painting is viewed. By contrast, 
the audience encounters an opera or a play 
over a specific time, which is the duration 
of the performance. Similarly, novels and 
poems are read in a prescribed temporal 
sequence, whereas a picture has no clear 
place at which to start viewing, or at 
which to finish. Thus art works themselves 
encourage us to view them superficially , 
without appreciating the richness of detail 
and labour that is involved. 
Consequently, the dominant critical 
approach becomes that of the art historian, 
a specialised academic approach devoted to 
'discovering the meaning
1 
of art within the 
cultural context of its time. This is in perfect 
harmony with the museum's function, since 
the approach is dedicated to seeking out and 
conserving 'authentic', 'original' readings of 
the exhibits. Again, this seems to put paid 
to that spontaneous, participatory criticism 
which can be found in abundance in 
criticism of classic works of literature, but is 
absent from most art history. 
The displays of art museums serve 
as a warning of what critical practices 
can emerge when spontaneous criticism 
is suppressed. The museum public , like 
any other audience , experience art more 
rewardingly when given the confidence 
to express their views. If appropriate 
works of fine art could be rendered 
permanently accessible to the public by 
means of high-fidelity reproductions, as 
literature and music already are, the public 
may feel somewhat less in awe of them. 
Unfortunately, that may be too much to ask 
from those who seek to maintain and control 
the art establishment. 
50 AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 
Reading 
Questions 27- 31 
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-L , below. 
Write the correct letter, A- L, in boxes 27- 31 on your answer sheet. 
The value attached to original works of art 
People go to art museums because they accept the value of seeing an original work of art. 
But they do not go to museums to read original manuscripts of novels, perhaps because the 
availability of novels has depended on 27 -···················· for so long. and also because with novels. the 
28 ...................... are the most important thing. 
However, in historical times artists such as Leonardo were happy to instruct 29 .................... .. 
to produce copies of their work and these days new methods of reproduct ion allow excellent 
replication of surface relief features as well as colour and 30 ...................... . 
It is regrettable that museums still promote the superiority of original works of art. since 
this may not be in the interests of the 31 .................. -.. . 
A institution B mass production c mechanical processes 
D public E paints F artist 
G size H underlying ideas basic technology 
J readers K picture frames L assistants 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 51 
Test 2 
Questions 32-35 
Choose the co"ect letter, A, B, C or D. 
Write the correct letter in boxes 32-35 on your answer sheet. 
32 The writer mentions London's National Gallery to illustrate 
A the undesirable cost to a nation of maintaining a huge collection of art. 
B the conflict that may arise in society between financial and artistic values. 
C the negative effect a museum can have on visitors' opinions of themselves . 
D the need to put individual well-being above large-scale artistic schemes. 
33 The writer says that today, viewers may be unwilling to criticise a work because 
A they lack the knowledge needed to support an opinion . 
B they fear it may have financial implications. 
C they have no real concept of the work's value. 
D they feel their personal reaction is of no significance . 
34 According to the writer, the 'displacement effect' on the visitor is caused by 
A the variety of works on display and the way they are arranged. 
B the impossibility of viewing particular works of art over a long period . 
C the similar nature of the paintings and the lack of great works. 
D the inappropriate nature of the individual works selected for exhibition . 
35 The writer says that unlike other forms of art, a painting does not 
52 
A 
B 
c 
D 
involve direct contact with an audience . 
require a specific location for a performance. 
need the involvement of other professionals . 
have a specific beginning or end. 
APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 36-40 
Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3? 
In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write 
YES 
NO 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the views of the writer 
if the statement contradicts the views of the writer 
if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this 
36 Art history should focus on discovering the meaning of art using a range of media . 
37 The approach of art historians conflicts with that of art museums . 
38 People should be encouraged to give their opinions openly on works of art. 
39 Reproductions of fine art should only be sold to the public if they are of high quality. 
40 In the future, those with power are likely to encourage more people to enjoy art. 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 53 