Reading 
READING 
READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Question s 1-13, which are based on 
Reading Passage 1 below . 
. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Stepwells 
~ A millennium ago, stepwells were fundamental to life in the driest 
parts of India. Richard Cox travelled to north-western India to 
document these spectacular monuments from a bygone era 
During the sixth and sevent h cent uries, 
. the inhabitants of the modern-day 
1 states of Gujarat and Rajast han in 
~ north-western lndia developed a 
i method of gaining access to clean . fresh 
; groundwater during the dry season for 
; drinking, bathing. watering animals and 
; irrigation. How€'ver, the significance 
of this invenlion - the stepwell - goes 
beyond its utilitarian application. 
Unique to this region , stepwells are 
often architecturally complex and vary 
widely in size and shape. During their 
heyday, they wore places of gathering, 
of leisure and relaxati on and of worship 
for villagers of all but the lowest classes. 
Most stepwe lls are found dotted round 
the desert areas of Gujarat (where they 
are called uav) and Rajasthan (where 
they are called baori), while a few also 
survive in Delhi. Some were located in 
or near villages as public spaces for the 
community; others were positioned beside 
roads as resting places for travellers. 
As their name suggests. stepwells 
comprise a series of stone steps 
descending from ground level to the 
water source (normally an und erground 
aquifer) as it recedes following the rain s . 
When the water level was high, tho user 
needed only to descend a few steps to 
reach it: when it was low, severa l levels 
would have to be negotiated. 
Some wells are vast, open craters with 
hundreds of steps paving eac h sloping 
side, often in tiers. Others are more 
elaborate. with long steppe d passages 
leading to the water via several storeys. 
Built from stone and support ed by pillars. · 
they also included pavilions that sheltered 
visitor s from the relentless heat. But 
perhaps the most impressive feat ures 
are the intri cate decorative sculptur es 
that embelllsh many stepwells, showing 
activities from fighting u.nd dancing to 
everyday acts such as women combing 
their hair or churning butter . 
Down the centuries. thousands of wells 
were const ructed throughout north­
western India , but the majorit y have now 
fallen into disuse; many are derelict and 
dry, as groundwater has been diverted 
for industrial use and the wells no longer 
reach the water tabl e. Their condition 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 17 
Test 1 
hasn't been helped by recent dry spells: 
southern Rajasthan suffered an eight-year 
drought between 1996 and 2004. 
However, some important sites in 
Gujarat have recent ly undergon e major 
restoration , and the state government 
announced in June last year that it plans 
to restore the stepwells throughout the 
state . 
In Pa tan, the state's ancient capital, the 
stepweJl of Rani Ki Vav (Queen's Stepwell) 
is perhaps the finest current example. 
It was built by Queen Udayamati during 
the late 11th century, but became silte d 
up following a flood during the 13th 
century . But the Archaeo logical Survey 
of India began restoring it in the 1960s , 
and today it is in pristine condition. At 
65 nietres long, 20 metres wide and 27 
metres deep, Rani Ki Vav features 500 
sculpt ures carved into niches throughout 
the monument. Incredibly , in January 
2001, this ancient structure survived an 
earthquake that measured 7.6 on the 
Richter scale . 
~ Another examp le is the Surya Kund in 
~ Modhera. northern Gujarat, next to the 
~ Sun Temple, built by King Bhima I in 1026 
~ to honour the sun god Surya. It actually 
~ resembles a tank (kund means reservoir 
~ or pond) rather than a well , but displays 
~ the hallmarks of stepwell architecture, 
~ including four sides of steps that descend 
~ to the bottom in a stunning geometrical 
~ formation. The terraces house 108 small, 
~ intricately carved shrines between the 
~ sets of steps. 
Rajasthan also has a wealth of wells. 
~ The ancient city of Bundi, 200 kilometres 
~ south of Jaipur, is renowned for its 
~ architecture. including its stepwells. 
One of the larger examples is Raniji Ki 
Baori , which was built by the queen of the 
region, Nathavatji , in 1699. At 46 metres 
deep, 20 metres wide and 40 metres long. 
the intricately carved monument is one of . 
21 baoris commissioned in the Bundi area ~ 
by Nathavatji. ~ 
In the old ruined town of Abhancri, about 
95 kilometres east of Jaipur, is Chand 
Baori, one of India 's oldest and deepest 
wells; aesthetically it's perhaps one of the 
most dramatic . Built in around 850 AD 
next to the temple of Harshat Mata, the 
baori comprises hundreds of zigzagg ing 
steps that run along three of its sides, 
steeply descending 11 storeys, resulting 
in a striking pattern when soen from afar. 
On the fourth side , verandas which are 
supported by ornate pillars overlook the 
steps. 
Still in public use is Neemrana Ki Baori , 
located just off the Jaipur-Delhi highway. 
Constructed in around 1700, it is nine 
storeys deep, with the last two being 
underwater. At ground level , there are 
86 colonnaded openings from where the 
visitor descends 170 steps to the deepest 
water source. 
Today, following years of neglect, many of 
these monuments to med1eval engineering ~ 
have been saved by the Archaeological ~ 
Survey of India , which has recognised the ~ 
importance of preserving them as part of ~ 
the country's rich history. Tourists flock ~ 
to wells in far·.flung corners of north- ~ 
western India to gaze in wonder at these : 
architectural marvels from hundreds of 
years ago, which serve as a reminder of 
both the ingenuity and artistry of ancient 
civilisations and of the value of water to 
human existence. 
. . .................................................................................................................................................. 
18 APARI NBSH IELTS House I www.IELTS-Hous e . cOlll 
Reading 
Questions 1-5 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1? 
In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
;f the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
1 Examples of ancient stepwells can be found all over the world. 
2 Stepwells had a range of functions, in addition to those related to water collection. 
3 The few existing stepwells in Delhi are more attractive than those found elsewhere. 
4 It took workers many years to build the stone steps characteristic of stepwells. 
5 The number of steps above the water revel in a stepwell altered during the course 
of a year. 
Questions 6-8 
Answer the questions below. 
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 6-8 on your answer sheet. 
6 Which part of some stepwells provided shade for people? 
7 What type of serious climatic event, which took place in southern Rajasthan, is 
mentioned in the article? 
8 Who are frequent visitors to stepwells rnowadays? 
AFARINESH IBLTS House I www.IBLTS-House .com 19 
Test 1 
Questions 9-13 
Complete the table below. 
Choose ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet. 
Step well Date Features Other notes 
Rani Kl Vav Late As many as 500 Restored in the 1960s 
11th sculptures decorate the 
century monument Excellent condition , despite 
the 9 ...................... of 2001 . 
Surya Kund 1026 Steps on the Looks more like a 
10 ...................... produce a 11 ...................... than a well 
geometrical pattern 
Carved shrines 
Rani}/ Ki 1699 Intricately carved One of 21 baoris in the area 
Baorl monument commissioned by Queen 
Nathavatji 
Chand Baorl 850AD Steps take you down 11 Old, deep and very 
storeys to the bottom dramatic 
Has 12 .. ······-········ which 
provide a view of the steps 
Neemrana 1700 Has two 13 --······· Used by public today 
Kl Baorl levels 
20 
AFARINESH IBLTS House I www.IBLTS-House .com 
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 2 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Question s 14-26 , which are based on Reading 
Passage 2 on the following pages . 
Questions 14-21 
Reading Passage 2 has nine paragraphs, A-1. 
Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A-E and G-1 from the list of headings below. 
Write the correct number, I-xi, in boxes 14-21 on your answer sheet. 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
List of Headings 
A fresh and Important long·term goal 
ii Charging for roads and improving other transport methods 
iii Changes affecting the distances goods may be transported 
iv Taking all the steps necessary to change transport patterns 
v The environmental costs of road transport 
vi The escalating cost of rail transport 
vii The need to achieve transport rebalance 
viii The rapid growth of private transport 
Ix Plans to develop major road networks 
x Restricting road use through charging policies alone 
xi Transport trends in countries awaiting EU admission 
Paragraph A 
Paragraph B 
Paragraph C 
Paragraph D 
Paragraph E 
Example 
Paragraph F 
Answer 
vii 
19 Paragraph G 
20 Paragraph H 
21 Paragraph I 
AFARINESB IELTS Bouse I www.IKLTS-Bouse.com 21 
Test 1 
EUROPEAN TRANSPORT SYSTEMS 
1990-2010 
What have been the trends and what are the prospects for 
European transport systems? 
A It is difficult to conceive of vigorous economic growth without an efficient transport 
system. Although modern information technologies can reduce the demand for physical 
transport by facilitating teleworking and teleservices, the requirement for transport 
continues to increase. There are two key factors behind this trend. For passenger 
transport, the determining factor is the spectacular growth in car use. The number 
of cars on European Union (EU) roads saw an increase of three million cars each year 
from 1990 to 2010, and in the next decade the EU will see a further substantial 
increase in its fleet. 
B As far as goods transport is concerned, growth is due to a large extent to changes in 
the European economy and its system of production. In the last 20 years, as internal 
frontiers have been abolished, the EU has moved from a 'stock' economy to a 'flow' 
economy. This phenomenon has been emphasised by the relocation of some industries, 
particularly those which are labour intensive, to reduce production costs, even though 
the production site is hundreds or even thousands of kilometres away from the final 
assembly plant or away from users. 
C The strong economic growth expected in countries which are candidates for entry to 
the EU will also increase transport flows, in particular road haulage traffic. In 1998, 
some of these countries already exported more than twice their 1990 volumes and 
imported more than five times their 1 990 volumes. And although many candidate 
countries inherited a transport system which encourages rail, the distribution between 
modes has tipped sharply in favour of road transport since the 1990s. Between 
1990 and 1998, road haulage increased by 19.4%, while during the same period rail 
haulage decreased by 43.5%, although - and this could benefit the enlarged EU - it is 
still on average at a much higher level than in existing member states. 
D However, a new imperative - sustainable development - offers an opportunity for 
adapting the EU's common transport policy. This objective, agreed by the Gothenburg 
European Council, has to be achieved by integrating environmental considerations 
into Community policies, and shifting the balance between modes of transport lies at 
the heart of its strategy . The ambitious objective can only be fully achieved by 2020, 
but proposed measures are nonetheless a first essential step towards a sustainable 
transport system which will ideally be in place in 30 years' time, that is by 2040. 
22 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
E In 1998, energy consumption in the transport sector was to blame for 28% of 
emissions of C02 , the leading greenhouse gas. According to the latest estimates, if 
nothing is done to reverse the traffic growth trend , C02 emissions from transport can 
be expected to increase by around 50'/o to 1 , 113 billion tonnes by 2020 , compared 
with the 739 billion tonnes recorded in 1990. Once again, road transport is the main 
culprit since it alone accounts for 84% of the C02 emissions attributable to transport . 
Using alternative fuels and improving energy efficiency is thus both an ecological 
necessity and a technological challenge. 
F At the same time greater efforts must be made to achieve a modal shift . Such a 
change cannot be achieved overnight , all the less so after over half a century of 
constant deterioration in favour of road. This has reached such a pitch that today rail 
freight services are facing marginalisation, with just 8% of market share, and with 
international goods trains struggling along at an average speed of 1 8km/h. Three 
possible options have emerged. 
G The first approach would consist of focusing on road transport solely through pricing. 
This option would not be accompanied by complementary measures in the other modes 
of transport . In the short term it might curb the growth in road transport through 
the better loading ratio of goods vehicles and occupancy rates of passenger vehicles 
expected as a result of the increase in the price of transport . However, the lack of 
measures available to revitalise other modes of transport would make it impossible for 
more sustainable modes of transport to take up the baton . 
H The second approach also concentrates on road transport pric ing but is accompanied 
by measures to increase the efficiency of the other modes (better quality of services, 
logistics, technology). However, this approach does not include investment in new 
infrastructure, nor does it guarantee better regional cohesion. It could help to achieve 
greater uncoupling than the first approach, but road transport would keep the lion's 
share of the market and continue to concentrate on saturated arteries, despite being 
the most polluting of the modes . It is therefore not enough to guarantee the necessary 
shift of the balance . 
The third approach, which is not new, comprises a series of measures ranging from 
pricing to revitalising alternative modes of transport and targeting investment in the 
trans-European network. This integrated approach would allow the market shares of 
the other modes to return to their 1998 levels and thus make a shift of balance. It is 
far more ambitious than it looks, bearing in mind the historical imbalance in favour of 
roads for the last fifty years , but would achieve a marked break in the link between road 
transport growth and economic growth, without placing restrictions on the mobility of 
people and goods . 
23 
AFARINESH IELTS Bouse I www.IRLTS-House.com 
Test 1 
Questions 22-26 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 2? 
In boxes 22-26 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
if the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
22 The need for transport is growing , despite technological developments . 
23 To reduce production costs, some industries have been moved closer to their 
relevant consumers. 
24 Cars are prohibitively expensive in some EU candidate countries . 
25 The Gothenburg European Council was set up 30 years ago. 
26 By the end of this decade, C02 emissions from transport are predicted to reach 
739 billion tonnes . 
24 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 3 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40 , which are based on Reading 
Passage 3 below. 
The psychology of innovation 
Why are so few companies truly innovative ? 
Innovation is key t.o busines.s survival, and 
companies put substantial resources into 
inspiring emp loyees to develop new ideas. 
There are , nevertheless ., people working in 
luxurious, state-of-the-art centres designed 
to stimulate innovation who find that their 
environ ment doesn't make them feel at all 
creative. And there are those who don't 
have a budget, or much space, but who 
innovate successful ly. 
For Robert B. Cialdini, Professor of 
Psychology at Arizona State University, 
one reason that companies don't succeed 
as often as they should is that innovation 
starts with recruitment. Research shows 
that the flt between an employee's values 
and a company
1
s value s makes a difference 
to what contribution they make and 
whether , two years after they join , they're 
still at the company. Studies at Harvard 
Business School s how that, although some 
individuals may be more creative than 
others, almost every individual can be 
creative in the right circumstances. 
One of the most famous photographs in the 
story of rock'n'roll emphasises Cialdini 's 
views . The 1956 picture of singers Elvis 
Presley , Carl Perkins, Johnny Cash and 
Jerry Lee Lewis jamming at a piano in Sun 
Studios in Memphis tells a hidden story. 
Sun's 'million-dollar quartet' could have 
been a quintet Missing from the picture 
is Roy Orbison, a greater natural singer 
than Lewis , Perkins or Cash. Sam Phillips , 
who owned Sun, wanted tiO revolutionis e 
popular music with songs that fused 
black and white music , and country and 
blues. Presley , Cash, Perkin s and Lewis 
instinctively understood Phillips's ambition 
and believed in il. Orbison wasn't inspired 
by the goal , and only ever achieved one hit 
with the Sun label. 
The value fit matters, says Ciald ini, 
because innovation is, in part, a process 
of change , and under that pressure we, 
as a species, behave differently, 'When 
things change, we are hard-wired to 
play it safe.' Managers should the ref ore 
adopt an approach that appears counter­
intuitive - they should explain what stands 
to be lost if the company fails to seize a 
particular opportunity . Studies show that 
we invariably take more gambles when 
threatened with a loss than when offered a 
reward. 
Managing innovation is a delicate art 
It's easy for a comp .any to be pulled in 
conflicting directions as the marketing, 
product development, and finance 
departments each get differ ent feedback 
from different sets of people . And without 
a system which ensures collaborative 
exchanges within the company, it's also 
easy for small 'pockets of innovation' to 
disappear . Innovation is a contact sport. 
You can't brief people just by saying, 'We're 
going in this direction and I'm going to take 
you with me.' 
AFARINESH IBLTS House I www.IBLTS-House .com 25 
Test 1 
Cialdini believes that this 'follow-the-­
leader syndrome' is dangerous, not least 
because it encourages bosses to go it 
alone . 'It's been scie ntifically proven that 
three people will be better than one at 
solving problems, even if that one person 
is the smartest person in the field.' To 
prove his point, Cialdini cites an interview 
with molecular biologist James Watson. 
Watson, together with Fran cis Crick, 
discovered the structure of DNA, the 
genetic information carrier of all living 
organisms. 'When asked how they had 
cracked the code ahead of an array of 
highly accomplished rival investigators, he 
said something that stunned me. He said 
he and Crick had succeeded because they 
were awar e that they weren 't the most 
intelligent of the scientists pursuing the 
answer. The smartest scientist was called 
Rosalind Franklin who, Watson said, "was 
so intelligent she rarely sought advice".' 
Teamwork taps into one of the basic 
drivers of human behaviour . 'The principle 
of social proof is so pervasive that we don't 
even recognise it,' says Cialdini. 'lf your 
proje ct is being resisted , for example, by a 
group of veteran employees, ask another 
old-time r to speak up for it.' Cialdini is not 
alone in advocating this strategy. Research 
shows that peer power, used horizontally 
not vertical ly, is much more powerful than 
any boss's speech. 
Writing, visualising and prototyping can 
stimulate the flow of new ideas. Cialdini 
cites scores of research papers and 
historical events that prove that even 
something as simple as writing deepens 
every individual's engagement in the 
projecL It is, he says, the reaso n why all 
those competitions on breakfast cereal 
packets encouraged us to write in saying, 
in no more than 10 words : 'I like Kellogg's 
Corn F1akes because .... 
1 
The very act of 
writing makes us more likely to believe il 
Authority do esn't have to inhibit innovation 
but it often does. The wrong kind of 
leadership will lead to what Cialdini calls 
'captainitis , the regre ttable tendency 
of team members to opt out of team 
responsibilitie s that are properly theirs '. He 
calls it captainitis because, he says, 'crew 
members of multipilot aircraft exhibit a 
sometimes deadly passivity when the flight 
captain makes a clearly wrong-headed 
decision'. This behaviour is not, he says, 
unique to air travel, but can happen in any 
workplace where the leader is overb earing . 
At the other end of the scale is the 1980s 
Memphis design collective , a group of 
young designers for whom 'the only 
rule was that there were no rules '. This 
environment encouraged a free interchange 
of ideas, which led to more creativity with 
form, function , colour and materials that 
revolutionised attitudes to furniture design. 
Many theorists believe the ideal boss 
should lead from behind , taking pride in 
collective accomplishment and giving 
credit where it is due. Cialdini says: 
'Leaders should encourage everyone to 
contribute and simultaneous ly assure all 
concerned that every recommendation is 
important to making the right decision and 
will be given full attention.' The frustrating 
thing about innovation is that there are 
many approaches , but no magic formula. 
However , a manager who wants to create 
a truly innovative culture can make their 
job a lot easier by recognis ing these 
psychological realities . 
26 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House .c:Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 27- 30 
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. 
Write the correct letter in boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet. 
27 The example of the 'million-dollar quartet' underlines the writer's point about 
A recognising talent. 
B working as a team. 
C having a shared objective. 
D being an effective leader. 
28 James Watson suggests that he and Francis Crick won the race to discover the 
DNA code because they 
A were conscious of their own limitations. 
B brought complementary skills to their partnership. 
C were determined to outperform their brighter rivals. 
D encouraged each other to realise their joint ambition. 
29 The writer mentions competitions on breakfast cereal packets as an example of 
how to 
A inspire creative thinking. 
B generate concise writing. 
C promote loyalty to a group. 
D strengthen commitment to an idea. 
30 In the last paragraph. the writer suggests that it is important for employees to 
A be aware of their company's goals. 
B feel that their contributions are valued. 
C have respect for their co-workers' achievements. 
D understand why certain management decisions are made. 
AFARINESH IELTS Bouse I www.IRLTS-House.com 27 
Test 1 
Questions 31-35 
Complete each sentence with the correct ending , A-G , below. 
Write the correct letter, A- G, in boxes 31-35 on your answer sheet. 
31 Employees whose values match those of their employers are more likely to 
32 At times of change, people tend to 
33 If people are aware of what they might lose, they will often 
34 People working under a dominant boss are liable to 
35 Employees working in organisations with few rules are more likely to 
A take chances. 
B share their ideas. 
c become competitive . 
D get promotion . 
E avoid risk. 
F ignore their duties . 
G remain in their jobs. 
28 APARINESH IBLTS House I www.IELTS-House . c:Ol'll 
Reading 
Questions 3~40 
Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3? 
In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write 
YES 
NO 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer 
if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer 
if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this 
36 The physical surroundi ngs in which a person works play a key role in determining 
their creativity . 
37 Most people have the potential to be creative . 
38 Teams work best when their members are of equally matched intelligence . 
39 It is easier for smaller companies to be innovative . 
40 A manager's approval of an idea is more persuasive than that of a colleague. 
AFARINESH IBLTS House I www.IBLTS-House . com 29 