Reading 
READING 
READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading 
Passage 1 below. 
The life and work of Marie Curie 
Marie Curie is probably the most famous woman 
scientist who has ever lived. Born Maria Sklodowska 
in Poland in 1867, she is famous for her work on 
radioactivity, and was twice a winner of the Nobel 
Prize. With her husband, Pierre Curie, and Henri 
Becquerel, she was awarded the 1903 Nobel Prize for 
Physics, and was then sole winner of the 1911 Nobel 
Prize for Chemistry. She was the first woman to win a 
Nobel Prize. 
From childhood, Marie was remarkable for her 
prodigious memory, and at the age of 16 won a gold 
medal on completion of her secondary education. Because her father lost his savings through 
bad investment, she then had to take work as a teacher. From her earnings she was able to 
finance her sister Bronia's medical studies in Paris, on the understanding that Bronia would, in 
turn, later help her to get an education. 
In 1891 this promise was fulfilled and Marie went to Paris and began to study at the 
Sorbonne (the University of Paris). She often worked far into the night and lived on little more 
than bread and butter and tea. She came first in the examination in the physical sciences in 
1893, and in 1894 was placed second in the examination in mathematical sciences. It was not 
until the spring of that year that she was introduced to Pierre Curie. 
Their marriage in 1895 marked the start of a partnership that was soon to achieve results of 
world significance. Following Henri Becquerel's discovery in 1896 of a new phenomenon, which 
Marie later called 'radioactivity', Marie Curie decided to find out if the radioactivity discovered 
in uranium was to be found in other elements. She discovered that this was true for thorium. 
Turning her attention to minerals, she found her interest drawn to pitchblende, a mineral 
whose radioactivity, superior to that of pure uranium, could be explained only by the presence 
in the ore of small quantities of an unknown substance of very high activity. Pierre Curie joined 
her in the work that she had undertaken to resolve this problem, and that led to the discovery 
of the new elements, polonium and radium. While Pierre Curie devoted himself chiefly to 
the physical study of the new radiations, Marie Curie struggled to obtain pure radium in the 
metallic state. This was achieved with the help of the chemist Andre-Louis Debierne, one of 
87 


Test4 
Pierre Curie's pupils. Based on the results of this research, Marie Curie received her Doctorate 
of Science, and in 1903 Marie and Pierre shared with Becquerel the Nobel Prize for Physics for 
the discovery of radioactivity. 
The births of Marie's two daughters, Irene and Eve, in 1897 and 1904 failed to interrupt 
her scientific work. She was appointed lecturer in physics at the Ecole Normale Superieure for 
girls in Sevres, France (1900). and introduced a method of teaching based on experimental 
demonstrations. In December 1904 she was appointed chief assistant in the laboratory directed 
by Pierre Curie. 
The sudden death of her husband in 1906 was a bitter blow to Marie Curie, but was also a 
turning point in her career: henceforth she was to devote all her energy to completing alone 
the scientific work that they had undertaken. On May 13, 1906, she was appointed to the 
professorship that had been left vacant on her husband's death, becoming the first woman to 
teach at the Sorbonne. In 1911 she was awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for the isolation 
of a pure form of radium. 
During World War I, Marie Curie, with the help of her daughter Irene, devoted herself to the 
development of the use of X-radiography, including the mobile units which came to be known 
as 'Little Curies', used for the treatment of wounded soldiers. In 1918 the Radium Institute, 
whose staff Irene had joined, began to operate in earnest, and became a centre for nuclear 
physics and chemistry. Marie Curie, now at the highest point of her fame and, from 1922, a 
member of the Academy of Medicine, researched the chemistry of radioactive substances and 
their medical applications. 
In 1921, accompanied by her two daughters, Marie Curie made a triumphant journey to the 
United States to raise funds for research on radium. Women there presented her with a gram of 
radium for her campaign. Marie also gave lectures in Belgium, Brazil, Spain and Czechoslovakia 
and, in addition, had the satisfaction of seeing the development of the Curie Foundation in 
Paris, and the inauguration in 1932 in Warsaw of the Radium Institute, where her sister Bronia 
became director. 
One of Marie Curie's outstanding achievements was to have understood the need to 
accumulate intense radioactive sources, not only to treat illness but also to maintain an 
abundant supply for research. The existence in Paris at the Radium Institute of a stock of 1.5 
grams of radium made a decisive contribution to the success of the experiments undertaken 
in the years around 1930. This work prepared the way for the discovery of the neutron by 
Sir James Chadwick and, above all, for the discovery in 1934 by Irene and Frederic Joliot-
Curie of artificial radioactivity. A few months after this discovery, Marie Curie died as a result 
of leukaemia caused by exposure to radiation. She had often carried test tubes containing 
radioactive isotopes in her pocket, remarking on the pretty blue-green light they gave off. 
Her contribution to physics had been immense, not only in her own work, the importance 
of which had been demonstrated by her two Nobel Prizes, but because of her influence on 
subsequent generations of nuclear physicists and chemists. 
88 


Reading 
Questions 1-6 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1? 
In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
if the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
1 
Marie Curie's husband was a joint winner of both Marie's Nobel Prizes. 
2 
Marie became interested in science when she was a child. 
3 
Marie was able to attend the Sorbonne because of her sister's financial 
contribution. 
4 
Marie stopped doing research for several years when her children were born. 
5 
Marie took over the teaching position her husband had held. 
6 
Marie's sister Bronia studied the medical uses of radioactivity. 
89 


Test4 
Questions 7-13 
Complete the notes below. 
Choose ONE WORD from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet. 
Marie Curie's research on radioactivity 
• 
When uranium was discovered to be radioactive, Marie Curie found that the 
element called 7 ...................... had the same property. 
• 
Marie and Pierre Curie's research into the radioactivity of the mineral known 
as 8 ...................... led to the discovery of two new elements. 
• 
In 1911, Marie Curie received recognition for her work on the element 
9 ...................... . 
• 
Marie and Irene Curie developed X-radiography which was used as a medical 
technique for 10 ...................... . 
• 
Marie Curie saw the importance of collecting radioactive material both for 
research and for cases of 11 ...................... . 
• 
The radioactive material stocked in Paris contributed to the discoveries in the 
1930s of the 12 ...................... and of what was known as artificial radioactivity. 
• 
During her research, Marie Curie was exposed to radiation and as a result she 
suffered from 13 ...................... . 
90 


Reading 
READING PASSAGE 2 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26 which are based on Reading 
Passage 2 below. 
Young children's sense of identity 
A 
A sense of self develops in young children by degrees. The process can usefully be 
thought of in terms of the gradual emergence of two somewhat separate features: 
the self as a subject, and the self as an object. William James introduced the distinction 
in 1892, and contemporaries of his, such as Charles Cooley, added to the developing 
debate. Ever since then psychologists have continued building on the theory. 
B 
According to James, a child's first step on the road to self-understanding can 
be seen as the recognition that he or she exists. This is an aspect of the self that 
he labelled 'self-as-subject', and he gave it various elements. These included an 
awareness of one's own agency (i.e. one's power to act), and an awareness of one's 
distinctiveness from other people. These features gradually emerge as infants 
explore their world and interact with caregivers. Cooley (1902) suggested that a 
sense of the self-as-subject was primarily concerned with being able to exercise 
power. He proposed that the earliest examples of this are an infant's attempts to 
control physical objects, such as toys or his or her own limbs. This is followed by 
attempts to affect the behaviour of other people. For example, infants learn that 
when they cry or smile someone responds to them. 
C 
Another powerful source of information for infants about the effects they can 
have on the world around them is provided when others mimic them. Many 
parents spend a lot of time, particularly in the early months, copying their infant's 
vocalizations and expressions. In addition, young children enjoy looking in mirrors, 
where the movements they can see are dependent upon their own movements. 
This is not to say that infants recognize the reflection as their own image (a later 
development). However, Lewis and Brooks-Gunn (1979) suggest that infants' 
developing understanding that the movements they see in the mirror are contingent 
on their own, leads to a growing awareness that they are distinct from other people. 
This is because they, and only they, can change the reflection in the mirror. 
D 
This understanding that children gain of themselves as active agents continues 
to develop in their attempts to co-operate with others in play. Dunn (1988) points 
out that it is in such day-to-day relationships and interactions that the child's 
understanding of his- or herself emerges. Empirical investigations of the self-as-
subject in young children are, however, rather scarce because of difficulties of 
communication: even if young infants can reflect on their experience, they certainly 
cannot express this aspect of the self directly. 
91 


Test4 
E 
Once children have acquired a certain level of self-awareness, they begin to 
place themselves in a whole series of categories, which together play such an 
important part in defining them uniquely as 'themselves'. This second step in the 
development of a full sense of self is what James called the 'self-as-object'. This has 
been seen by many to be the aspect of the self which is most influenced by social 
elements, since it is made up of social roles (such as student, brother, colleague) and 
characteristics which derive their meaning from comparison or interaction with 
other people (such as trustworthiness, shyness, sporting ability). 
F 
Cooley and other researchers suggested a close connection between a person's own 
understanding of their identity and other people's understanding of it. Cooley 
believed that people build up their sense of identity from the reactions of others 
to them, and from the view they believe others have of them. He called the self-
as-object the 'looking-glass self', since people come to see themselves as they are 
reflected in others. Mead (1934) went even further, and saw the self and the social 
world as inextricably bound together: 'The self is essentially a social structure, and 
it arises in social experience ... it is impossible to conceive of a self arising outside 
of social experience.' 
G 
Lewis and Brooks-Gunn argued that an important developmental milestone is 
reached when children become able to recognize themselves visually without the 
support of seeing contingent movement. This recognition occurs around their 
second birthday. In one experiment, Lewis and Brooks-Gunn (1979) dabbed some 
red powder on the noses of children who were playing in front of a mirror, and then 
observed how often they touched their noses. The psychologists reasoned that if 
the children knew what they usually looked like, they would be surprised by the 
unusual red mark and would start touching it. On the other hand, they found that 
children of 15 to 18 months are generally not able to recognize themselves unless 
other cues such as movement are present. 
H 
Finally, perhaps the most graphic expressions of self-awareness in general can 
92 
be seen in the displays of rage which are most common from 18 months to 3 
years of age. In a longitudinal study of groups of three or four children, Bronson 
(1975) found that the intensity of the frustration and anger in their disagreements 
increased sharply between the ages of 1and2 years. Often, the children's 
disagreements involved a struggle over a toy that none of them had played with 
before or after the tug-of-war: the children seemed to be disputing ownership rather 
than wanting to play with it. Although it may be less marked in other societies, the 
link between the sense of 'self' and of 'ownership' is a notable feature of childhood 
in Western societies. 


Reading 
Questions 14-19 
Reading Passage 2 has eight paragraphs, A-H. 
Which paragraph contains the following information? 
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet. 
NB You may use any letter more than once. 
14 an account of the method used by researchers in a particular study 
15 the role of imitation in developing a sense of identity 
16 the age at which children can usually identify a static image of themselves 
17 a reason for the limitations of scientific research into 'self-as-subject' 
18 reference to a possible link between culture and a particular form of behaviour 
19 examples of the wide range of features that contribute to the sense of 'self-as-
object' 
93 


Test4 
Questions 20-23 
Look at the following findings (Questions 20-23) and the list of researchers below. 
Match each finding with the correct researcher or researchers, A-E. 
Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 20-23 on your answer sheet. 
20 
A sense of identity can never be formed without relationships with other people. 
21 
A child's awareness of self is related to a sense of mastery over things and people. 
22 At a certain age, children's sense of identity leads to aggressive behaviour. 
23 
Observing their own reflection contributes to children's self awareness. 
List of Researchers 
A 
James 
B 
Cooley 
c 
Lewis and Brooks-Gunn 
D 
Mead 
E 
Bronson 
94 


Reading 
Questions 24-26 
Complete the summary below. 
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet. 
How children acquire a sense of identity 
First, children come to realise that they can have an effect on the world around them, 
for example by handling objects, or causing the image to move when they face a 
24 ....................... This aspect of self-awareness is difficult to research directly, because of 
25 ...................... problems. 
Secondly, children start to become aware of how they are viewed by others. One 
important stage in this process is the visual recognition of themselves which usually 
occurs when they reach the age of two. In Western societies at least, the development 
of self awareness is often linked to a sense of 26 ...................... , and can lead to disputes. 
95 


Test4 
READING PASSAGE 3 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading 
Passage 3 on the following pages. 
Questions 27-30 
Reading Passage 3 has six paragraphs, A-F. 
Choose the correct heading for paragraphs B-E from the list of headings below. 
Write the correct number, I-vii, in boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet. 
List of Headings 
Commercial pressures on people in charge 
ii 
Mixed views on current changes to museums 
iii 
Interpreting the facts to meet visitor expectations 
iv 
The international dimension 
v 
Collections of factual evidence 
vi 
Fewer differences between public attractions 
vii 
Current reviews and suggestions 
Example 
Answer 
Paragraph A 
v 
27 
Paragraph B 
28 
Paragraph C 
29 
Paragraph D 
30 
Paragraph E 
96 


Reading 
The Development of 
Museums 
A The conviction that historical relics provide infallible testimony about the past is 
rooted in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when science was regarded 
as objective and value free. As one writer observes: 'Although it is now evident that 
artefacts are as easily altered as chronicles, public faith in their veracity endures: a 
tangible relic seems ipso facto real: Such conviction was, until recently, reflected in 
museum displays. Museums used to look - and some still do - much like storage 
rooms of objects packed together in showcases: good for scholars who wanted to 
study the subtle differences in design, but not for the ordinary visitor, to whom it all 
looked alike. Similarly, the information accompanying the objects often made little 
sense to the lay visitor. The content and format of explanations dated back to a time 
when the museum was the exclusive domain of the scientific researcher. 
B Recently, however, attitudes towards history and the way it should be presented 
have altered. The key word in heritage display is now'experience: the more exciting 
the better and, if possible, involving all the senses. Good examples of this approach 
in the UK are the Jorvik Centre in York; the National Museum of Photography, Film 
and Television in Bradford; and the Imperial War Museum in London. In the US 
the trend emerged much earlier: Williamsburg has been a prototype for many 
heritage developments in other parts of the world. No one can predict where the 
process will end. On so-called heritage sites the re-enactment of historical events 
is increasingly popular, and computers will soon provide virtual reality experiences, 
which will present visitors with a vivid image of the period oftheir choice, in which 
they themselves can act as if part of the historical environment. Such developments 
have been criticised as an intolerable vulgarisation, but the success of many historical 
theme parks and similar locations suggests that the majority of the public does not 
share this opinion. 
C In a related development, the sharp distinction between museum and heritage sites 
on the one hand, and theme parks on the other, is gradually evaporating. They already 
borrow ideas and concepts from one another. For example, museums have adopted 
story lines for exhibitions, sites have accepted 'theming' as a relevant tool, and theme 
parks are moving towards more authenticity and research-based presentations. In 
zoos, animals are no longer kept in cages, but in great spaces, either in the open air or 
in enormous greenhouses, such as the jungle and desert environments in Burgers' Zoo 
in Holland. This particular trend is regarded as one of the major developments in the 
presentation of natural history in the twentieth century. 
97 


Test4 
D Theme parks are undergoing other changes, too, as they try to present more serious 
social and cultural issues, and move away from fantasy. This development is a 
response to market forces and, although museums and heritage sites have a special, 
rather distinct, role to fulfil, they are also operating in a very competitive environment, 
where visitors make choices on how and where to spend their free time. Heritage and 
museum experts do not have to invent stories and recreate historical environments 
to attract their visitors: their assets are already in place. However, exhibits must be 
both based on artefacts and facts as we know them, and attractively presented. Those 
who are professionally engaged in the art of interpreting history are thus in a difficult 
position, as they must steer a narrow course between the demands of 'evidence' 
and 'attractiveness; especially given the increasing need in the heritage industry for 
income-generating activities. 
E It could be claimed that in order to make everything in heritage more'real; historical 
accuracy must be increasingly altered. For example, Pithecanthropus erectus 
is depicted in an Indonesian museum with Malay facial features, because this 
corresponds to public perceptions. Similarly, in the Museum of Natural History in 
Washington, Neanderthal man is shown making a dominant gesture to his wife. Such 
presentations tell us more about contemporary perceptions of the world than about 
our ancestors. There is one compensation, however, for the professionals who make 
these interpretations: if they did not provide the interpretation, visitors would do it 
for themselves, based on their own ideas, misconceptions and prejudices. And no 
matter how exciting the result, it would contain a lot more bias than the presentations 
provided by experts. 
F Human bias is inevitable, but another source of bias in the representation of history 
has to do with the transitory nature of the materials themselves. The simple fact is 
that not everything from history survives the historical process. Castles, palaces and 
cathedrals have a longer lifespan than the dwellings of ordinary people. The same 
applies to the furnishings and other contents of the premises. In a town like Leyden in 
Holland, which in the seventeenth century was occupied by approximately the same 
number of inhabitants as today, people lived within the walled town, an area more 
than five times smaller than modern Leyden. In most of the houses several families 
lived together in circumstances beyond our imagination. Yet in museums, fine period 
rooms give only an image of the lifestyle of the upper class of that era. No wonder 
that people who stroll around exhibitions are filled with nostalgia; the evidence in 
museums indicates that life was so much better in the past. This notion is induced by 
the bias in its representation in museums and heritage centres. 
98 


Questions 31-36 
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. 
Write the correct letter in boxes 31-36 on your answer sheet. 
31 
Compared with today's museums, those of the past 
A 
did not present history in a detailed way. 
B 
were not primarily intended for the public. 
C 
were more clearly organised. 
D 
preserved items with greater care. 
32 According to the writer, current trends in the heritage industry 
A 
emphasise personal involvement. 
B 
have their origins in York and London. 
C 
rely on computer images. 
D 
reflect minority tastes. 
33 The writer says that museums, heritage sites and theme parks 
A 
often work in close partnership. 
B 
try to preserve separate identities. 
C 
have similar exhibits. 
D 
are less easy to distinguish than before. 
34 The writer says that in preparing exhibits for museums, experts 
A 
should pursue a single objective. 
B 
have to do a certain amount of language translation. 
C 
should be free from commercial constraints. 
D 
have to balance conflicting priorities. 
35 
In paragraph E, the writer suggests that some museum exhibits 
A 
fail to match visitor expectations. 
B 
are based on the false assumptions of professionals. 
C 
reveal more about present beliefs than about the past. 
D 
allow visitors to make more use of their imagination. 
36 The passage ends by noting that our view of history is biased because 
A 
we fail to use our imagilation. 
B 
only very durable objects remain from the past. 
C 
we tend to ignore things that displease us. 
D 
museum exhibits focus too much on the local area. 
Reading 
99 


Test4 
Questions 37-40 
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3? 
In boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet, write 
TRUE 
FALSE 
NOT GIVEN 
if the statement agrees with the information 
if the statement contradicts the information 
if there is no information on this 
37 Consumers prefer theme parks which avoid serious issues. 
38 
More people visit museums than theme parks. 
39 
The boundaries of Leyden have changed little since the seventeenth century. 
40 
Museums can give a false impression of how life used to be. 
100 
