 
 
 
 
 
 
First 
 
Reading and Use of English 
 
Sample Test 1 
 
D251/01 
 
 
 
Time 
 
 
 
1 hour 15 minutes 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES 
Do not open this question paper until you are told to do so. 
Write your name, centre number and candidate number on your answer sheet if they are 
not already there. 
Read the instructions for each part of the paper carefully. 
Answer all the questions. 
Read the instructions on the answer sheet. 
Write your answers on the answer sheet. Use a pencil. 
You must complete the answer sheet within the time limit. 
At the end of the test, hand in both this question paper and your answer sheet. 
 
 
INFORMATION FOR CANDIDATES 
There are 52 questions in this paper. 
Questions 1 – 24 and 43 – 52 carry one mark. 
Questions 25 – 30 carry up to two marks. 
Questions 31 – 42 carry two marks. 
 
 
 
* 
  
 
 
Copyright © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2022 
500/2705/0 Cambridge English Level 1 Certificate in ESOL International 
2 
 
 
Part 1 
 
For questions 1 – 8, read the text below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits each gap. 
There is an example at the beginning (0). 
 
Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet. 
Example: 
0 A band B set C branch D series 
 
0 A B C D 
 
 
 
 
What is genealogy? 
 
Genealogy is a (0) …..... of history.  It concerns family history, (1) …..... than the national or world 
history studied at school.  It doesn’t merely involve drawing a family tree, however – tracing your 
family history can also (2) …..... in learning about your roots and your identity.  The internet enables 
millions of people worldwide to (3) ...….. information about their family history, without great (4) ...….. . 
 
 
People who research their family history often (5) ...….. that it’s a fascinating hobby which (6) …........ 
a lot about where they come from and whether they have famous ancestors.  According to a survey 
involving 900 people who had researched their family history, the chances of discovering a celebrity in 
your past are one in ten.  The survey also concluded that the (7) …..... back you follow your family 
line, the more likely you are to find a relation who was much wealthier than you are.  However, the 
vast majority of people who (8) …..... in the survey discovered they were better off than their 
ancestors. 3 
 
 
1 A instead B rather C except D sooner 
 
2 
 
A 
 
cause 
 
B 
 
mean 
 
C 
 
result 
 
D 
 
lead 
 
3 
 
A 
 
accomplish 
 
B 
 
access 
 
C 
 
approach 
 
D 
 
admit 
 
4 
 
A 
 
fee 
 
B 
 
price 
 
C 
 
charge 
 
D 
 
expense 
 
5 
 
A 
 
describe 
 
B 
 
define 
 
C 
 
remark 
 
D 
 
regard 
 
6 
 
A 
 
reveals 
 
B 
 
opens 
 
C 
 
begins 
 
D 
 
arises 
 
7 
 
A 
 
older 
 
B 
 
greater 
 
C 
 
higher 
 
D 
 
further 
 
8 
 
A 
 
attended 
 
B 
 
participated 
 
C 
 
included 
 
D 
 
associated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over ► 4 
 
 
Part 2 
 
For questions 9 – 16, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each gap. Use only 
one word in each gap. There is an example at the beginning (0). 
 
Write your answers IN CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet. 
 
Example: 0  A S                  
 
 
 
 
Motorbike stunt rider 
I work (0) .......... a motorbike stunt rider – that is, I do tricks on my motorbike at shows. The Le Mans 
 
race track in France was (9) …….. I first saw some guys doing motorbike stunts.  I’d never seen 
anyone riding a motorbike using just the back wheel before and I was (10) …….. impressed I went 
straight home and taught (11) …….. to do the same.  It wasn’t very long before I began to earn my 
living at shows performing my own motorbike stunts. 
 
 
I have a degree (12) …….. mechanical engineering; this helps me to look at the physics (13) …….. 
lies behind each stunt. In addition to being responsible for design changes to the motorbike, I have to 
work (14) …….. every stunt I do.  People often think that my work is very dangerous, but, apart 
(15) ........... some minor mechanical problem happening occasionally during a stunt, nothing ever goes 
 
wrong. I never feel in (16) .......... kind of danger because I’m very experienced. 5 
 
 
Part 3 
 
For questions 17 – 24, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of the 
lines to form a word that fits in the gap in the same line. There is an example at the beginning (0). 
 
Write your answers IN CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet. 
 
Example: 0  C O M M O N L Y            
 
 
 
An incredible vegetable  
Garlic, a member of the Liliacaea family which also includes onions, is 
 
(0) …….... used in cooking all around the world. China is currently the 
largest (17) …….... of garlic, which is particularly associated with the 
dishes of northern Africa and southern Europe.  It is native to central 
Asia and has long had a history as a health -giving food, used both to 
prevent and cure (18) ................ In Ancient Egypt, workers building the 
pyramids were given garlic to keep them strong, while Olympic 
athletes in Greece ate it to increase their resistance to infection. 
 
 
The forefather of antibiotic medicine, Louis Pasteur, claimed garlic  
was as (19) …….... as penicillin in treating infections.  Modern-day 
(20)............. have proved that garlic can indeed kill bacteria and even 
 
some viruses, so it can be very useful for people who have coughs 
and colds.  In (21) …….... , some doctors believe that garlic can 
reduce blood (22) …….... . 
 
 
The only (23) ............. to this truly amazing food is that the strong and 
 
rather (24) ............ smell of garlic is not the most pleasant! 
 
 
COMMON 
PRODUCT 
 
 
 
ILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECT 
SCIENCE 
 
 
ADD 
PRESS 
 
ADVANTAGE 
SPICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over ► 6 
 
 
Part 4 
 
For questions 25 – 30, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first 
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given . You must use between two and 
five words, including the word given. Here is an example (0). 
 
Example: 
 
0 A very friendly taxi driver drove us into town. 
 DRIVEN 
 We ................................................................................. a very friendly taxi driver. 
 
The gap can be filled by the words ‘were driven into town by’, so you write: 
 
Example: 0  WERE  DRIVEN  INTO  TOWN  BY 
 
Write only the missing words IN CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet. 
 
 
25 Joan was in favour of visiting the museum. 
 
IDEA 
 Joan thought it would be ................................................................................. to the museum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 Arthur has the talent to become a concert pianist. 
 
THAT 
 Arthur is so ................................................................................. could become a concert pianist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 ‘Do you know when the match starts, Sally?’ asked Mary. 
 
IF 
 Mary asked Sally ................................................................................. time the match started. 7 
 
 
28 I knocked for ages at Ruth’s door but I got no reply. 
 
LONG 
 I ................................................................................. knocking at Ruth’s door but I got no reply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 Everyone says that the band is planning to go on a world tour next year. 
 
SAID 
 The band ................................................................................. planning to go on a world tour next year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 I’d prefer not to cancel the meeting. 
 
CALL 
 I’d rather ................................................................................. the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over ► 8 
 
 
Part 5 
 
You are going to read an extract from a novel in which a young woman called Caitlin talks about her 
life on an island.  For questions 31 – 36, choose the answer ( A, B, C or D) which you think fits best 
according to the text. 
 
Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
line 31 
We live on the island of Hale. It's about four kilometres long and two kilometres wide at its broadest 
point, and it's joined to the mainland by a causeway called the Stand - a narrow road built across the 
mouth of the river which separates us from the rest of the country. Most of the time you wouldn't know 
we're on an island because the river mouth between us and the mainland is just a vast stretch of tall 
grasses and brown mud. But when there's a high tide and the water rises a half a metre or so above 
the road and nothing can pass until the tide goes out again a few hours later, then you know it's an 
island. 
 
We were on our way back from the mainland. My older brother, Dominic, had just finished his first year 
at university in a town 150 km away. Dominic's train was due in at five and he'd asked for a lift back 
from the station. Now, Dad normally hates being disturbed when he's writing (which is just about all the 
time), and he also hates having to go anywhere, but despite the typical sighs and moans – why can't he 
get a taxi? what's wrong with the bus? – I could tell by the sparkle in his eyes that he was really looking 
forward to seeing Dominic. 
 
So, anyway, Dad and I had driven to the mainland and picked up Dominic from the station. He had 
been talking non-stop from the moment he'd slung his rucksack in the boot and got in the car. 
University this, university that, writers, books, parties, people, money, gigs. .... And when I say talking, I 
don't mean talking as in having a conversation, I mean talking as in jabbering like a mad thing. I didn't 
like it ..... the way he spoke and waved his hands around as if he was some kind of intellectual or 
something. It was embarrassing. It made me feel uncomfortable – that kind of discomfort you feel when 
someone you like, someone close to you, suddenly starts acting like a complete idiot. And I didn't like 
the way he was ignoring me, either. For all the attention I was getting I might as well not have been 
there. I felt a stranger in my own car. 
 
As we approached the island on that Friday afternoon, the tide was low and the Stand welcomed us 
home, stretched out before us, clear and dry, beautifully hazy in the heat – a raised strip of grey 
concrete bound by white railings and a low footpath on either side, with rough cobbled banks leading 
down to the water. Beyond the railings, the water was glinting with that wonderful silver light we 
sometimes get here in the late afternoon which lazes through to the early evening. 
 
We were about halfway across when I saw the boy. My first thought was how odd it was to see 
someone walking on the Stand. You don't often see people walking around here. Between Hale and 
Moulton (the nearest town about thirty kilometres away on the mainland), there's nothing but small 
cottages, farmland, heathland and a couple of hills. So islanders don't walk because of that. If they're 
going to Moulton they tend to take the bus. So the only pedestrians you're likely to see around here are 
walkers or bird-watchers. But even from a distance I could tell that the figure ahead didn't fit into either 
of these categories. I wasn't sure how I knew, I just did. 
 
As we drew closer, he became clearer. He was actually a young man rather than a boy. Although he 
was on the small side, he wasn't as slight as I'd first thought. He wasn't exactly muscular, but he wasn't 
weedy-looking either. It's hard to explain. There was a sense of strength about him, a graceful strength 
that showed in his balance, the way he held himself, the way he walked.... 9 
 
 
 
31 In the first paragraph, what is Caitlin's main point about the island? 
 A It can be dangerous to try to cross from the mainland. 
 B It is much smaller than it looks from the mainland. 
 C It is only completely cut off at certain times. 
 D It can be a difficult place for people to live in. 
32 What does Caitlin suggest about her father? 
 A His writing prevents him from doing things he wants to with his family. 
 B His initial reaction to his son's request is different from usual. 
 C His true feelings are easily hidden from his daughter. 
 D His son's arrival is one event he will take time off for. 
33 Caitlin emphasises her feelings of discomfort because she 
 A is embarrassed that she doesn't understand what her brother is talking about. 
 B feels confused about why she can't relate to her brother any more. 
 C is upset by the unexpected change in her brother's behaviour. 
 D feels foolish that her brother's attention is so important to her. 
34 In the fourth paragraph, what is Caitlin's purpose in describing the island? 
 A to express her positive feelings about it 
 B to explain how the road was built 
 C to illustrate what kind of weather was usual 
 D to describe her journey home 
35 In 'because of that' in line 31, 'that' refers to the fact that 
 A locals think it is odd to walk anywhere. 
 B it is easier for people to take the bus than walk. 
 C people have everything they need on the island. 
 D there is nowhere in particular to walk to from the island. 
36 What do we learn about Caitlin's reactions to the boy? 
 A She felt his air of confidence contrasted with his physical appearance. 
 B She was able to come up with a reason for him being there. 
 C She realised her first impression of him was inaccurate. 
 D She thought she had seen him somewhere before. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over ► 10 
 
40 
 
Part 6 
You are going to read a newspaper article in which a former ballet dancer talks about the physical 
demands of the job. Six sentences have been removed from the article.  Choose from the sentences 
A – G the one which fits each gap ( 37 – 42). There is one extra sentence which you do not need to 
use. 
Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet. 
Good preparation leads to success in ballet dancing 
 
 
A former classical ballet dancer explains what ballet training actually involves. 
 
What we ballet dancers do is instinctive, but 
instinct learnt through a decade of training.  A 
dancer’s life is hard to understand, and easy to 
misinterpret. Many a poet and novelist has tried 
to do so, but even they have chosen to interpret 
all the hard work and physical discipline as 
obsessive. And so the idea persists that dancers 
Those first classes I took were remarkably similar 
to the last.  In fact, taking into account the 
occasional new idea, ballet classes have  
changed little since 1820, when the details of 
ballet technique were first written down, and are 
easily recognised in any country.  Starting with 
the left hand on the barre, the routine unrolls over 
spend every waking hour in pain, bodies at 
breaking point, their smiles a pretence. 
some 75 minutes. 
dancers have to do it. 
Even the leading 
 
As a former dancer in the Royal Ballet Company 
here in Britain, I would beg to question this. 
With expert teaching and daily 
practice, its various demands are easily within  
the capacity of the healthy human body. Contrary 
to popular belief, there is no need to break bones 
or tear muscles to achieve ballet positions.  It is 
simply a question of sufficient conditioning of the 
muscular system. 
 
Over the course of my dancing life I worked my 
way through at least 10,000 ballet classes. I took 
These classes serve two distinct purposes: they 
are the way we warm our bodies and the 
mechanism by which we improve basic 
technique. In class after class, we prove the old 
saying that ‘practice makes perfect’. 
And it is also this daily repetition which enables 
us to strengthen the muscles required in jumping, 
spinning or lifting our legs to angles impossible to 
the average person. 
 
The human body is designed to adapt to the 
demands we make of it, provided we make them 
my first at a school of dance at the age of seven carefully and over time. In the same 
and my last 36 years later at the Royal Opera 
House in London. In the years between, ballet 
class was the first thing I did every day. It starts 
at an early age, this daily ritual, because it has to. 
But for a ballet dancer in particular, 
this lengthy period has to come before the effects 
of adolescence set in, while maximum flexibility 
can still be achieved. 
way, all those years of classes add up to a fit -for- 
purpose dancing machine. This level of physical 
fluency doesn’t hurt; it feels good. 
 
But they should not be misled: there is 
a difference between hard work and hardship. 
Dancers have an everyday familiarity with the 
first. Hardship it isn’t. 
37 
38 
39 
41 
42 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
Through endless tries at the usual exercises 
and frequent failures, ballet dancers develop 
the neural pathways in the brain necessary to 
control accurate, fast and smooth movement. 
 
E 
 
The principle is identical in the gym – pushing 
yourself to the limit, but not beyond, will 
eventually bring the desired result. 
B The ballet shoe offers some support, but the 
real strength is in the muscles, built up through 
training. 
F No one avoids this: it is ballet’s great 
democratiser, the well established members of 
the company working alongside the newest 
recruits. 
C As technology takes away activity from the  
lives of many, perhaps the ballet dancer’s 
physicality is ever more difficult for most people 
to imagine. 
G 
 
It takes at least a decade of high-quality, 
regular practice to become an expert in any 
physical discipline. 
 
D 
 
Ballet technique is certainly extreme but it is 
not, in itself, dangerous. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turn over ► 12 
 
 
Part 7 
 
You are going to read a newspaper article about a young professional footballer. For questions 43 – 
52, choose from the sections (A – D). The sections may be chosen more than once. 
 
Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet. 
 
 
Which paragraph 
 
states how surprised the writer was at Duncan’s early difficulties? 43 
  
says that Duncan sometimes seems much more mature than he really is? 44 
  
describes the frustration felt by Duncan’s father? 45 
  
says that Duncan is on course to reach a high point in his profession? 46 
  
suggests that Duncan caught up with his team-mates in terms of physical development? 47 
  
explains how Duncan was a good all-round sportsperson? 48 
  
gives an example of how Gavin reassured his son? 49 
  
mentions Duncan’s current club’s low opinion of him at one time? 50 
  
mentions a personal success despite a failure for the team? 51 
  
explains how Duncan and his father are fulfilling a similar role? 52 13 
 
 
Rising Star 
Margaret Garelly goes to meet Duncan Williams, who plays for Chelsea Football Club. 
 
 
A It’s my first time driving to Chelsea’s training 
ground and I turn off slightly too early at the 
London University playing fields.  Had he 
accepted football’s rejections in his early 
teenage years, it is exactly the sort of ground 
Duncan Williams would have  found himself 
running around on at weekends.  At his current 
age of 18, he would have been a bright first-year 
undergraduate mixing his academic studies with 
a bit of football, rugby and cricket, given his  
early talent in all these sports.  However, 
Duncan undoubtedly took the right path. Instead 
of studying, he is sitting with his father Gavin in 
one of the interview rooms at Chelsea’s training 
base reflecting on Saturday’s match against 
Manchester City.  Such has been his rise to  
fame that it is with some disbelief that you listen 
to him describing how his career was nearly all 
over before it began. 
C Duncan takes up the story: ‘The first half of that 
season I played in the youth team.  I got lucky – 
the first -team manager came to w atch us play 
QPR, and though we lost 3 -1, I had a really  
good game.  I moved up to the first team after 
that performance.’  Gavin points out that it can  
be beneficial to be smaller and weaker when  
you are developing – it forces you to learn how 
to keep the ball better, how to use ‘quick feet’ to 
get out of tight spaces. ‘A couple of years ago, 
Duncan would run past an opponent as if he 
wasn’t there but then the other guy would close 
in on him. I used to say to him, “Look, if you can 
do that now, imagine what you’ll be like when 
you’re 17, 18 and you’re big and quick and they 
won’t be able to get near you.”  If you’re a 
smaller player, you have to use your brain a lot 
more.’ 
B 
 
Gavin, himself a fine footballer – a member of 
the national team in his time – and now a 
professional coach, sent Duncan to three 
professional clubs as a 14 year -old, but all three 
turned him down.  ‘I worked with him a lot when 
he was around 12, and it was  clear he had 
fantastic technique and skill.  But then the other 
boys shot up in height and he didn’t.  But I was 
still upset and surprised that no team seemed to 
want him, that they couldn’t see what he might 
develop into in time.  When Chelsea accepted 
him as a junior, it was made clear to him that  
this was more of a last chance than a new 
beginning. They told him he had a lot of hard 
work to do and wasn’t part of their plans. 
Fortunately, that summer he just grew and grew, 
and got much stronger as well.’ 
D 
 
Not every kid gets advice from an ex -England 
player over dinner, nor their own private training 
sessions. Now Duncan is following in Gavin’s 
footsteps. He has joined a national scheme 
where people like him give advice to ambitious 
young teenager s who are hoping to become 
professionals. He is an old head on young 
shoulders. Yet he’s also like a young kid in his 
enthusiasm. And fame has clearly not gone to 
his head; it would be hard to meet a more 
likeable, humble young man.  So will he get to 
play for the national team?  ‘One day I’d love to, 
but when that is, is for somebody else to  
decide.’ The way he is playing, that won’t be 
long. 14 
BLANK PAGE 
 
 15 
BLANK PAGE 
 
 16 
BLANK PAGE 
 
 