===== PAGE 1 =====
Test 1 
READING 
READING PASSAGE 1 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading 
Passage 1 below . 
... . .. .. . .. .. .. . . . . .. . .. . . . . .. . . . . . .. .. .. . .. .. . . . . ... . . .. .. . ... .. . .. . . . . . . . . .. . .. .. ... .. . . . . ·-............................................ ' ..... . 
. Crop-growing skyscrapers 
. . . 
By the year 2050. nearly 80% of 
the Earth's population will live in 
urban centres. Applying the most 
conservative estimates to current 
demographic trends, the human 
population will increase by about 
three billion geople by then. An 
estimated 10 hectares of new land 
(about 20% larger than Brazil) will be 
needed to grow enoµgh food to feed 
them. if traditional fanning methods 
continue as they are practised today. 
At present. throughout the world. 
over 80% of the land that is suitable 
for raising crops is in use. Historically, 
some 15% of that has been laid waste 
by poor management practices. What 
can be done to ensure enough food 
for the worid's population to live on? 
The concept of indoor farming is 
not new, since hothouse production 
of tomatoes and other produce has 
been in vogue for some time. What 
is new is the urgent need to scale 
up this technology to accommodate 
another three billion people. Many 
believe an entirely new approach to 
indoor fanning is required. employing 
cutting-edge technologies. One such 
proposal is for the 'Vertical Fann". 
The concept is of multi-storey 
18 
buildings in which food crops are 
grown in environmentally controlled 
conditions. Situated in the heart of 
urban centres, they would drastically 
reduce the amount of transportation 
required to bring food to consumers. 
Vertical farms would need to be 
efficient, cheap to construct and 
safe to operate. If successfully 
implemented, proponents claim. 
vertical farms offer the promise 
of urban renewal. sustainable 
production of a safe and varied 
food supply (through year-round 
production of all crops). and the 
eventual repair of ecosystems that 
have been sacrificed for horizontal 
farming. 
It took humans 10.000 years to 
learn how to grow most of the crops 
we now t.ake for granted. Along the 
way, we despoiled most of the land 
we worked. often turning verdant. 
natural ecozones into semi-arid 
deserts. Within that same time frame. 
we evolved into an urban species, in 
which 60% of the human population 
now lives vertically in cities. This 
means that, for the majority. we 
humans have shelter from the 
elements. yet we subject our food-

===== PAGE 2 =====
bearing plants to the rigours of the 
great outdoors and can do no more 
than hope for a good weather year. 
However. more often than not now, 
due to a rapidly changing climate, 
that is not what happens. Massive 
floods, long droughts. hurricanes and 
severe monsoons take their toll each 
year. destroying millions of tons of 
valuable crops. 
The supporters of vertical farming 
claim many potential advantages for 
the system. For instance. crops would 
be produced all year round. as they 
would be kept in artificially controlled. 
optimum growing conditions. There 
would be no weather--related crop 
failures due to droughts. floods or 
pests. All the food could be grown 
organically, eliminating the need for 
herbicides, pesticides and fertilisers. 
The system would greatly reduce the 
. incidence of many infectious diseases 
that are acquired at the agricultural 
interface. Although the system would 
consume energy, it would return 
energy to the grid via methane 
generation from composting non-
edible parts of plants. It would also 
dramatically ~duce fossil fuel use. 
by cutting out the need for tractors. 
ploughs and shipping. 
A major drawback of vertical farming, 
however, is that the plants would 
require artificial light. Without it, 
those plants nearest the windows 
would be exposed to more sunlight 
and grow more quickly, reducing 
Reading 
the efficiency of the system. Single· 
storey greenhouses have the benefit 
of natural overhead light: even so, 
many still need artificial lighting. 
A multi-storey facility with no natural 
overhead light would require far 
more. Generating enough light could 
be prohibitively expensive, unless 
cheap, renewable energy is available, 
and this appears to be rather a future 
aspiration than a likelihood for the 
near future. 
One variation on vertical farming that 
has been developed is to grow plants 
in stacked trays that move on rails. 
Moving the trays allows the plants to 
get enough sunlight. This system is 
already in operation. and works well 
within a single-storey greenhouse 
with light reaching it from above: it 
is not certain. however. that it can be 
made to work without that overhead 
natural light. 
Vertical farming is an attempt to 
address the undoubted problems 
that we face in producing enough 
food for a growing population. At the 
moment. though, more needs to be 
done to reduce the detrimental impact 
it would have on the environment, 
particularly as regards the use of 
energy. While it is possible that 
much of our food will be grown in 
skyscrapers in future, most experts 
currently believe it is far more likely 
that we will simply use the space 
available on urban rooftops. 
19 
. 
. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Test 1 
Questions 1-7 
Complete the 881Jfences below. 
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS liom the passage for each BnSW8r. 
~your answers In boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet. 
Indoor farming 
1 
Some food plants, including --~---· , are already grown indoors. 
2 
Vertical fanns would be located in---.. -···- , meaning that there would be l•s 
need to take them long distances to customers. 
3 
Veftical farms could use methane from plants and animals to produce ·---·-··· ... 
• 
The consumption of --·-·--.. would be cut because agricultural vehicles would be 
oonecessary. 
5 
The fact that Yeftical farms would need _______ .. tight Is a disadvantage. 
6 
One form of vertical farming involves planting In----·-·· which are not fixed. 
1 
The most probable deYek>pment is that food will be grown on-····--.. ·-· in towns 
and cities. 
Questions 8-13 
Oo the foffowing statements agree with 1he information given In Reading Paasage 1? 
In boxes 8-13on your answer sheet. write 
1RUE 
, the statement 8gt98S with the infonnaf;on 
FALSE 
If the statement contntdlcfs the Information 
NOT GIVEN If the19 ls no inlormatJon on this 
8 
Methods for predicting the Earth's poputation have recently changed. 
9 
Human beings are responsible for some d the destruction to food-producing land. 
10 The crops produced in vertieal farms will depend on the season. 
11 Some damage to food crops is caused by climate change. 
12 Fertilisers wil be naaclad for certain crops in vectical fanns. 
13 Vertical fanning will make plants less~ to be a«ec:tad by infedlous dlseaw. 
20 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 2 
You 5hould spend about 20 minutes on Ouesflons 14-26, which are based on Reading 
Passage 2 below. 
THE FALKIRK WHEEL 
A unique engineering achievement 
The Falkirk Wheel in Scotland is the 
world's first and only rotating boat lift. 
Opened in 2002, it is central to the 
ambitious £84.Sm Millennium Link project 
to restore navigability across Scotland by 
reconnecting the historic waterways of the 
Forth & Clyde and Union Canals. 
The major challenge of the project lay in 
the fact that the Forth & Clyde Canal is 
situated 35 metres below the level of the 
Union Canal. Historically, the two canals 
had been joined near the town of Falkirk 
by a sequence of 11 locks - endosed 
sections of canal in which the water level 
could be raised or lowered - that stepped 
down across a distance of 1.5 km. This had 
been dismantled in 1933, thereby breaking 
the link. When the project was launched 
in 1994, the British Waterways authority 
were keen to create a dramatic twenty-first· 
century landmark which would not only be 
a fitting commemoration of the Millennium, 
but also a lasting symbol of the economic 
regeneration of the region. 
Numerous ideas were submitted for the 
project, induding concepts ranging from 
rolling eggs to tilting tanks, from giant see· 
saws to overhead monorails. The eventual 
winner was a plan for the huge rotating 
steel boat lift which was to become The 
Falkirk Wheel. The unique shape of the 
structure is claimed to have been inspired 
by various sources, both manmade and 
natural, most notably a Celtic double-
headed axe, but also the vast tuming 
propeller of a ship, the ribcage of a v.+tale 
or the spine of a fish. 
The various parts of The Falkirk Wheel 
were all constructed and assembled, like 
one giant toy building set, at Butterley 
Engineering~ Steelworks in Derbyshire, 
some 400 km from Falkirk. A team there 
carefully assembled the 1,200 tonnes 
of steel, painstakingly fitting the pieces 
together to an accuracy of just 10 mm to 
ensure a perfect final flt. In the summer of 
2<X>1, the structure was then dismantled 
and transported on 35 lorries to Falkirk. 
before all being bolted back together 
again on the ground, and finally lifted into 
position in five large sections by crane. The 
Wheel would need to withstand immense 
and constantly changing stresses as it 
rotated, so to make the structure more 
robust, the steel sections were bolted 
rather than welded together. Over 45,000 
bolt holes were matched with their bolts, 
and each bolt was hand-tightened. 
The Wheel consists of two sets of opposing 
axe-shaped arms, attached about 25 
metres apart to a fixed central spine. 
Two diametrically opposed water.filled 
'gondolas', each with a capacity of 360,000 
litres, are fitted between the ends of the 
arms. These gondolas always weigh the 
same, whether or not they are carrying 
boats. This is because, according to 
Archimedes' principle of displacement, 
21 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Test 1 
floating objects displace their own weight 
in water. So when a boat enters a gondola, 
the amount of water leaving the gondola 
weighs exactly the same as the boat. This 
keeps the Wheel balanced and so, despite 
its enormous mass, it rotates through 1&0° 
in five and a half minutes while using very 
little power. It takes just 1.5 kilowatt~hours 
(5.4 MJ) of energy to rotate the Wheel -
roughly the same as boiling eight small 
domestic kettles of water. 
Boats needing to be lifted up enter the 
canal basin at the level of the Forth & 
Clyde Canal and then enter the lower 
gondola of the Wheel. Two hydraulic steel 
gates are raised, so as to seal the gondola 
off from the water in the canal basin. The 
water between the gates is then pumped 
out A hydraulic clamp, which prevents 
the arms of the Wheel moving while the 
gondola is docked, is removed, allowing 
the Wheel to turn. In the central machine 
room an array often hydraulic motors 
then begins to rotate the central axle. The 
axle connects to the outer arms of the 
22 
Wheel, which begin to rotate at a speed 
of 118 of a revolution per minute. As the 
wheel rotates, the gondolas are kept in 
the upright position by a simple gearing 
system. Two eight-metre-wide cogs orbit 
a fixed inner cog of the same width, 
connected by two smaller cogs travelling 
in the opposite direction to the outer cogs 
- so ensuring that the gondolas always 
remain level. When the gondola reaches 
the top, the boat passes straight onto the 
aqueduct situated 24 metres above the 
canal basin. 
The remaining 11 metres of lift needed 
to reach the Union Canal is achieved by 
means of a pair of locks. The 'Mleel could 
not be constructed to elevate boats over 
the full 35-metre difference between the 
two canals, owing to the presence of the 
historically importantAntonine Wall, which 
was built by the Romans in the second 
century AD. Boats travel under this wall via 
a tunnel, then through the lodes, and finally 
on to the Union Canal. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Reading 
Questions 14-19 
Do the following statements agree with the lnfonnation given In Reading Passage 27 
In boJtes 14-19 on your answer sheet. wnte 
TRUE 
ii the statement agrees with th& information 
FALSE 
if the statement contradict.s the infOTmBtion 
NOT GIVEN if the/fl is no infonnation on this 
14 The Falklrtt Wheel has linked the Forth & Cl~e canal with the Union Canal for the 
first time In their hJstory. 
15 Thete was some opposition to the design of the Falkirk Wheel at first. 
16 The Falkirk Wheel was lnltlally put together at the location where Its components 
were manufac1ured. 
17 The Falkirk Wheel is the only boat lift in the WOf1d which has steel sec1ions bolted 
together by hand. 
18 The weight of the gondolas varies aCCOfdlng to the size of boat being carried. 
19 The construc:tlon of the Falkirk Wheel site took into account the presence of a 
nearby ancient monument. 
23 

===== PAGE 7 =====
Test1 
Questions 20-26 
Label the diagram below. 
Choose ONE WORD from the passage for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 20-26 on your answer sheet. 
How a boat is lifted on the Falkirk Wheel 
A pair cl 20 ........... ·--····· are lifted in order to 
shut out water from canal basin 
A 21 ···-·-··· .... " ..... is taken out, enabling Wheel to rotate 
21 ............ -........ ~.-E 
raise boat 11 m 
to level of Union 
Canal 
Boat travels 
through tunnel 
beneath Roman 
25 ····-················ 
Boat reaches top Wheel, then 
moves directly onto 2• ........ -........... . 
Hydraulic motors drive 22 ..................... . 
Boat is raised, 
.JIW"-- floating in one 
of Wheel"s two 
gondolas 
A range of different-sized 23 .. " ................. . 
ensures boat keeps upright 
24 
~'H'-'~j~~ 
www.irLanguage.com 

===== PAGE 8 =====
Reading 
READING PASSAGE 3 
You should spend about 20 minutes on Quesllon. 21-40, which ara based on Reading 
Passage 3 below. 
Reducing the EtFccts of Climate Change 
M4"' Rowe wports on the inaeasing'14mbitiow geo-mgiMningpmjeas 
/Hing exp/oTNJ by Scimlim 
A 
Such i5 OW' dependence on fossil fiiels. and such is rhe volume of carbon dioxide aJmdy 
ttlcascd into die atmosphere, that many experts agrcr that signi6cant global wanning is now 
incvicabJe. They bel~ that the besc we can do is keep it at a n::asonable Jew), and at pment 
the only serious option for doing this is cutting back on our carbon emissions. But while a few 
counttia arc making major strides in this n:gard. the majority an: having great difliculty CYen 
stemming che rate of incraae, Jet alone neversing it. Consequently, an increasing number of 
scientists are beginning to explore rhe alternative of po-engineering - a term whic:h generally 
refm to the intentional large-scale manipulation of dae environment. According to iu 
proponents, geo-enginecring is the equi¥alent of a backup generator: if Plan A - redu.cing OW' 
dependenc:.y on fossil fuds - fails, M requitt a Plan 8, employing grand sc:hemes to slow down 
or reverse the process of global warming. 
8 
Geo-engineering Jw bcien shown co work, at least on a small loealised scale. For decades, May 
Day parades in Mosmw baYC taken plaa: under clear blue skies, aircraft haing deposited dry 
ia:. silver iodide and ccmc.nt powder to disperse clouds. Many of the schemes now suggested 
Jook 10 do the opposise, and reduce the amount of sllnlight reaching the planet. lhe most 
~u:hing idea of all is susgestcd by Profasor Roger Angel of the Uniw:rsity of Arimna. His 
scheme would employ up to 16 trillion minu~ spac:eaaft, each 'W'Cighing about one gr.am. ro 
foim a transpanmt, sunlight-refracting sunshade in an orbit 1.S million km aboYC the Eanh. 
This could, argw:s Angel. reduce die amount of light reaching the Earth by tw0 per cent. 
C 
The majority of ~ring 
ptoje.ccs so far carried out - which include planting fotests 
in dcsc.rts and depositing iron in the omm to stimulate the growth of algae - have fucused on 
achieving a general cooling of the Earth. But some look specifically at rCYCtSing the melting 
at the polCi, panicularly the Arctic. lhe reasoning is that i! you replenish the ice sheeu and 
frozen waters of the high latitudes. mo~ light will be reftected back into spaa, so 1educing the 
warming of the «Keans and atmosphere. 
D 
'The concept of rckasing aerosol sprays into chc stratosphere above the Arctic has been proposed 
by several scientists. This would involve using sulphur OC' hydrogen sulphjde aero.sols so that 
sulphur dioxide would fonn douds. which would, in turn, lead 10 a global dimming. The idea 
is modelled on historic YOkanic expJO&ions, such as that of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines 
in 1991, which. led to ashon-term cooling of global tempeAtwa by O.S •c. Scientists have 
also scrutinised whether it's possible to prescrve the ice sheets of Greenland widi reinfora:d 
high-tension cables, p~ting i~ 
f10m moving into the sea. Meanwhile in die Russian 
Arctic. po-engineering plans in dude the planting of millions of birch trees. Whereas the 
regions native evergreen pines shade the snow and absorb radiation, birches would died their 
25 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Test 1 
E 
F 
G 
H 
26 
leaves in winter, thus enabling ndiation to be reflected by che snow. Re-routing Russian rivel$ 
co increase cold wa1er 8ow to ice-forming areas c:ouJd also be used to slow down warming. say 
some dimatc scientists. 
But will such schemes ~ 
be implemented~ Gener.ally speaking, those who are most cautious 
about geo-cngineering are the scientists invoMd in the raearch. Angel says that bis plan is 'no 
substitucc for developing renewable energy: the only permanent solution'. And Dr Phil Ruch of 
rhe US-based P.aci6c: Nonhwat National Laboratory is equally guarded about the role of gc:o-
cngina:ring: 'I think all of us agree that if 'Ne were to end po-engineering on a given day. then 
the planet would return to its p«e-cngineered condition \ICry rapidly, and probably within ten to 
twenry years. lhat's a:nalnly something to wony about.' 
The US National Center for Armosphetic: Raearch has already suggested that the proposal 
to injca sulphur into the atmosphere might afttct rain&ll patterns ac.rosa the tropics and the 
Southern Ocean. 'Geo-engineering plans ro inject srrarospheric aerosols or 10 seed clouds would 
act to cool Ille planet, and act to Jncn=ase the extent of sea Ice.' says Rasch. 'But all the models 
suggest some impact on the distribution of precipitation.' 
~further risk wich geo-cngineering projecu is that you can "overshoot•: says Dr Dan 
Lunt, fiom du: UnM:rs.iq of Bristol's School of Geophysical Sclcnc:n, who has studied the 
likd.y impacts of the sunshade and aerosol schemes on the dimate. 'You may bring global 
tcmpe.ratwa back to pre-industrial levels, but the risk is that the poles will still be warmer than 
they should be and the tropics wiJI be cooler than before industrialisation.' To avoid such a 
scenario. Lunt says Angel's project would have 10 operate at half mengih; all of which reinforces 
his view that the bat option is to avoid the need for geo-c:nginccring altogether. 
The main n:ason why geo-cnglnccring k supponed by many in the scientific: community is that 
most researchers have linlc F.aith in the ability of politiciam to ape - and then bring in - the 
ncccuary carbon c:uu. &en leading conservation organisations sec the value of invatigating the 
potential « geo-cngineering. According to Dr Manin Sommetkom, dimate change advisor for 
the World Wllclllf.: Fund's lnrcmatlonal An:tlc: Programme. 'Human-induced dlmau: change 
has brought humanity to a position where we shoutdn•t cxdudc thinking thoroughly about this 
topic and its possibilities.' 
c>.;.l .>:I a,._; t,?' ,,a 
-.lrLanguage.com 

===== PAGE 10 =====
Questions 27-29 
Reading Passage 3 has eight paragraphs A-H. 
Which paragraph contains the following information? 
Write the comJd letter, A-H. in boxes 27-29 on your answer shflet. 
27 mention of a geo-engtneef'lng project based on an earlier natural phenomenon 
28 an example of a successful use of geo-englneerfng 
29 a common definition of geo.engineering 
21 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Test 1 
Questions 30-36 
Complete the table below. 
Choose ONE WORD from the passage for each answer. 
Wlite your answe1S In boxes 30-36 on your answer sheet. 
GEO-ENGINEERING PROJECTS 
Procedure 
Alm 
put a large number of tiny spacecraft into to create a 30 ----·--that would reduce 
orbit far above Earth 
the amount of light reaching Earth 
place 31 -·---·-.. - in the sea 
to encourage 32 -···----·-·to form 
release aerosol sprays into the 
to create 33 --·-·-... that would reduce 
stratosphere 
the amount of llght reaching Earth 
fix strong 34 ----to Greenland ice 
to preyent icebergs moving into the sea 
sheets 
plant trees in Russian Arctic that would 
to allow the 35 --·-···--to reflect radiation 
lose thek' leaves In winter 
change the direction of 31 ------
to bring more cold water into ice-forming 
areas 
28 
o~·~ .:Jtj eJ11> 
www.irLIJl8Wlge.com 

===== PAGE 12 =====
Reading 
Questions 37-40 
Look at the following statements (Questions 37-40) and the list of scientists below. 
Match each statement with the correct scientist, A-D. 
Wrlte the correct letter; A-Q In boxes 31-40 on 'YOU' answer sheet. 
37 The effeda of geo-englneering may not be long-lasting. 
38 Geo engineering Is a topic worth exploring. 
39 tt rrmy be necessary to limit the effectiveness of geo-engineering projects. 
40 Research into non.foasll-based fuels cannot be replaced by gee-engineering. 
A 
B 
c 
D 
Ult of Scientists 
Roger Angel 
Phil Rasch 
Dan Lunt 
Martin Sommerkom 
~.t!l Ql:lj {!PJll 
••w.irLanguagc.com 
29 
